
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 5 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">January 30, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> All right. We've been talking about
arguments that might give us reason to believe in the existence of an
immaterial soul. The kinds of arguments we've been considering so far
all fall under the general rubric of "inference to the best
explanation." We posit--or the fans of souls posit--the existence of
souls so as to explain something that needs explaining about us. I've
gone through a series of such arguments, and the one that we ended with
last time was the suggestion that we need to believe in the existence
of a soul in order to explain the fact that we've got free will. The
fact that we've got free will is something that most of us take for
granted about ourselves. But the complaint then, or the objection to
the physicalist, takes the form that we couldn't be a merely physical
entity because no merely physical entity could have free will. But
we've got free will, so there's got to be something more to us than
just being a physical object. Now, if we push the dualist to explain
what is it about free will that rules out the possibility that we are
merely physical objects, I think the natural suggestion to spell out
the argument goes like this, and this is where we were at the end of
last time.</p>

<p>The thought is that, there's a kind of incompatibility with being
free and being determined. I mean, after all from the physicalist's
point of view, we're just a kind of glorified robot, able to do all
sorts of things that most robots in most science fiction movies can do.
But still, in a sense, we're just a glorified physical object. We're
just a robot. And robots, the objection goes, are programmed; they
necessarily follow their program. More generally speaking, we might
say, they're subject to deterministic laws--that, as physical objects,
it's true of them that they must do what the laws of physics and laws
of nature require that they do. And the laws of physics are--take a
deterministic form, determinism being a bit of philosopher's jargon for
when it's true of these laws that--or a physical--or a system--that if
you set it up a certain way, cause and effect plays out such that,
given that initial setup, the very same effect must follow. It's
determined by the laws of nature that the effect that follows will
follow from that cause. And so, if you rewind the tape and play it
again over and over and over again, each time you set things up the
very same way they must move or transform or change or end up in the
very same state. Well, that's what determinism is all about.</p>

<p>And intuitively, it seems plausible to many people that you couldn't
have free will and be subject to determinism. Because the notion of
free will was that even if I was in the very same spot again, the very
same situation again, I could've chosen differently. So I wasn't
determined or predetermined to make that choice. So if we were to spell
out the argument somewhat more fully, it might be, "We have free will,
but you can't both have free will and be subject to determinism or
subject to deterministic laws." And every physical object, or every
purely physical object, is subject to deterministic laws because the
laws of physics are deterministic. You put these things together and
you get the conclusion that we, since we've got free will, can't be a
purely physical object. There must be something more than the purely
physical to us.</p>

<p>That's the argument I put up on the board at the end of last class.
And here we've got it up here now. [See Figure 5.1] One, we have free
will. Two, nothing subject to determinism has free will. Three, all
purely physical systems are subject to determinism. So--a
conclusion--we are not a purely physical system. To explain the fact
that we've got free will, so the objection goes, we have to appeal
to--we have to posit--the existence of a soul, something non-physical,
something more than purely physical. Well, that's the argument. But I
don't myself find the argument compelling. Now, the first thing to
notice is that to get the conclusion we need all three premises. Give
up the conclusion that we've got--Give up the premise that "we've got
free will," it won't follow that we're non-physical. Even if something
that did have free will would have to be non-physical, it wouldn't
follow that we're non-physical. That's true for each one of the
premises. Give it up, the conclusion doesn't go through. And the
interesting thing is that each one of these premises could be plausibly
challenged.</p>

<p>Now, as I said last time, the subject of free will--or free will,
determinism, causation and responsibility, this cluster of problems--is
an extremely difficult and complicated physical problem. And we could
easily devote an entire semester to discussing it. So all we're doing
here is the most quick and superficial glance. But still, let me
quickly point out why you could resist the argument from free will to
the existence of a soul. First of all, as I just noted, the argument
needs premise number one. It's got to be the case, to prove that we've
got a soul--at least for this argument to work to prove that we've got
a soul--it's got to be the case that we've got free will.</p>

<p>Now, that could be challenged. There are philosophers who have said
we certainly believe that we've got free will, but it's an illusion. We
don't really have free will. Indeed, why don't we have free will? For
precisely the reasons that are pointed to by the rest of the argument.
They might say, "Oh, well, you know, we're physical objects;
determinism is true of us. No physical object that's subject to
determinism could have free will, so we don't have free will. Of
course, we mistakenly believe we've got free will. We are physical
objects that labor under the illusion that we have free will, but after
all, free will isn't something that you can just see, right? You can't
peer into your mind and see the fact that you've got free will. Yes,
we've got the sense that we could've acted differently, but maybe
that's an illusion." As I say, there are philosophers who've argued
that way, have denied that we have free will and if we do conclude that
we don't actually have free will, then we no longer have this argument
for the existence of a soul. It's a way to avoid the argument;
although, for what it's worth, I should mention I don't myself believe
that it's false that we have free will. That is to say, I do think
premise one is true. I myself think we do have free will. So although I
don't like, I don't believe the argument is sound--premise one doesn't
happen to be the premise I myself would want to reject.</p>

<p>But there are other, there are two other key premises. What about
premise number three, "All purely physical systems are subject to
determinism." Well, we need that premise as well to make the argument
go. Suppose we think, "Look, you can't have free will and determinism.
You can't combine them." The view that you can't combine them is
sometimes known as "incompatibilism" for the obvious reason. It's the
view that these two things are incompatible. You can't have determinism
and free will. Suppose we do believe in incompatibilism and believe
that we've got free will. It would follow then that we're not subject
to deterministic laws. Well, the dualist says, "That shows us that we
have to believe that there's something non-physical about us. Because
after all, premise three: â€˜All purely physical systems are subject to
determinism.' Isn't it true after all that the basic laws of physics
are deterministic laws?" And the answer is, "Well it's not so clear
that it is true." Which is just to say that premise three of the
argument can be rejected as well.</p>

<p>Now, at this point I have to just confess, as I've confessed at
other times before, three is a claim about empirical science. What does
our best theory about the laws of nature tell us? And I'm no scientist
and I'm no specialist in sort of empirical matters, and believe me, I'm
no authority on quantum mechanics, our best theory of fundamental
physics. Still, I take it--I gather--here's what I'm told--that the
standard interpretation of quantum mechanics says that, despite what
many of us might've otherwise believed, the fundamental laws of physics
are not, in fact, deterministic.</p>

<p>What does that mean? Suppose we've got some sort of radioactive
atom, which has a certain chance of decaying. What does that mean?
Well, it means that, you know, there's maybe, let's say, an 80 percent
chance that in the next 24 hours it will break down. Eighty percent of
atoms that are set up like that break down in the next 24 hours; 20
percent of them don't. Now, according to quantum mechanics under the
standard interpretation, that's all there is to say about it. You have
an atom like that, 80 percent chance in the next 24 hours it will break
down.</p>

<p>Suppose it does break down! Can we say why it broke down? Sure. We
can say, "Well, after all there was an 80 percent chance that it
would." Take an atom that after 24 hours hasn't broken down. Can we say
why it hasn't broken down? Sure. There was a 20 percent chance that it
wouldn't. Can we explain why the ones that do break down break down and
the ones that don't break down don't break down? No. All we can say is,
there was an 80 percent chance it would, 20 percent chance it wouldn't,
so most of them do, some of them don't. That's as deep as the
explanation goes. There is nothing more. Now, you know, when we've got
our deterministic hats on, we think to ourselves, "There's got to be
some underlying causal explanation, some feature about the break-down
atoms that explains why they broke down and that was missing from the
non-break-down atoms that explains why they don't break down. After
all, determinism, right? If you set up the atoms exactly the same way,
they've always got to break down." But the answer is, according to the
standard interpretation of quantum mechanics, that's not how it works.
All there is to say is, "Some of these are going to break down, and
some of these won't."</p>

<p>The fundamental laws of physics, according to the standard
interpretation of quantum mechanics, are probabilistic. Determinism is
not true at the level of fundamental physics. Well, that's what I'm
told. Believe me, I'm in no position to say, but that's what I'm told.
And of course, if that's true, then premise three is false. It just
isn't true that all purely physical systems are subject to determinism.
So even if it does turn out that you can't have free will and
determinism, that doesn't rule out the possibility that we are purely
physical objects, because not all purely physical systems are subject
to determinism. If determinism isn't true of us at the fundamental
level, then even if you couldn't both have determinism and free will,
we could still have free will, and yet, for all that, still be purely
physical systems.</p>

<p>While I'm busy pointing out ways in which the argument doesn't
succeed, I also want to just take a moment and mention that premise two
is also subject to criticism. Premise two was the incompatibilist claim
that, "nothing subject to determinism has free will." You can't combine
them. They're incompatible. Now, incompatibilism, I take it, is
probably something like the common-sense view here. It's the view that
probably most of you believe, but again, it's worth noting that
philosophically it can be challenged. There are philosophers--and here
I'll tip my hat and say, I'm one of them--there are philosophers who
believe that, in fact, the idea of free will is not incompatible with
determinism. So even if determinism were true of us, that wouldn't rule
out our having free will, because you can--appearances to the contrary
notwithstanding--have both determinism and free will. They're
compatible. Hence, this view is known as compatibilism.</p>

<p>If we accept compatibilism, we'll be able to say, "Look, maybe we
have free will and determinism is true of us; but for all that, we're
still just purely physical systems." Even if quantum mechanics was
wrong and somehow, you know, at the macro level all the indeterminism
boils out--whatever--and at the macro level we are deterministic
systems, so what? If a deterministic system could nonetheless have free
will, we could still be purely physical systems. Now, mind you, I
haven't said anything today to convince you of the truth of
compatibilism, nor am I going to try to do that. My point here was only
to say we shouldn't be so quick to think that we have to believe in the
existence of a soul in order to explain our having free will. It takes
all of the premises of the argument to get the conclusion that the soul
exists. And each one of the premises can be challenged. And here I mean
not merely, well, logically speaking, you know, of course you can
reject any premise of any argument. No. I mean, there are reasonable
philosophical or scientific grounds for worrying about each one of the
premises. The argument requires a lot. That doesn't prove that the
argument fails, but it does mean that you're going to have your work
cut out for you if you're going to use this route to arguing for the
existence of a soul.</p>

<p>All right. Let's recap. As I said, we've been considering different
kinds of arguments for the existence of a soul, each of which appeals
to some feature about us--our creativity, our ability to feel, the fact
that we have a qualitative aspect of experience, our ability to
reason--what have you. Some fact about us that calls out for
explanation, and the claim on the part of the dualists was, we couldn't
explain it without appealing to a soul. And I've argued--I've shared
with you my reasons for thinking that those arguments are not
compelling. But notice that all of the kinds of considerations I
pointed to so far are what we might think of as everyday, familiar
features about us. It's an everyday occurrence that we can think and
reason and feel and be creative, or choose otherwise and have free
will.</p>

<p>Maybe the better arguments for the soul focus not on the everyday
but on the unusual, on the supernatural. Here we might then have an
entire other family of arguments, set of arguments--again, still of the
form "inference to the best explanation." Maybe we need to posit the
soul in order to explain ghosts. Maybe we need to posit the soul in
order to explain ESP; maybe we need to posit the soul in order to
explain near-death experiences. Maybe we need to posit the soul in
order to explain what goes on in sÃ©ances or communications from the
dead or what have you. For any one of those, we could again run an
argument where we say, "Look, here is something that needs explaining.
The best explanation appeals to the soul."</p>

<p>Now, I'm going to be rather quicker in discussing this family of
arguments, but let me take at least a couple of minutes and do
something about that. Take, for example, near-death experiences. This
is something that you read a bit about in the selection from Schick and
Vaughn [Schick and Vaughn 2005, 207-323] in your course packet. The
basic idea was probably familiar to most of you anyway, that the
following thing happens with people who, you know, maybe their heart
goes into a cardiac arrest--what have you. They die on the operating
table, but then they're brought back to life, as we put it. And many
such people, when we question them afterwards, have a very striking
experience. And one of the things that's striking is, how similar the
experience is from person to person and from culture to culture--that
they've got some notion, as they were dead on the operating table, of
leaving their body. Perhaps they begin to view their body from
up--floating up above it. Eventually, perhaps, they leave the operating
room altogether in this experience that they're having, and they have a
feeling of joy and euphoria; they have some experience of going through
a tunnel, seeing some light at the end of the tunnel. Perhaps at the
other end of the tunnel they begin to have some communications or see
some loved one who has died previously or perhaps some famous religious
person in their--in the teaching of their tradition--their religious
tradition. They have the sense that what they've done is basically died
and gone to heaven. But then suddenly they get yanked back, and they
wake up, you know, in the hospital room. So they've had near-death
experiences. Or perhaps a better way to put it would be they've had
death experiences but then have been brought back to life.</p>

<p>Now, there it is, right? You survey people, and people have these
experiences. And now we have to ask ourselves, "What explains this?"
And here's a perfectly straightforward and natural explanation. These
people died. Their bodies died, and they went to the next world. They
went to the next life. They went to heaven but then were yanked back.
Now, their bodies were lying there on the operating table; their bodies
weren't in heaven. So something non-bodily went to heaven. That's how
the explanation goes. It's a natural, straightforward explanation of
what's gone on here. Hence, inference to the best explanation. We need
to posit the soul, something immaterial that survives the death of the
body, that can leave the body, go up to heaven; though, as it happens
in these cases, the tie is never completely broken. They get yanked
back; the soul gets yanked back by whatever cause, and reconnected to
the body.</p>

<p>It's as though we might think of there being two rooms, to use a
kind of analogy here. There is the room that this world represents,
this life represents. And what happens in these experiences is that
your soul leaves this room and goes into a second room, the room of the
next world or the next life, but for various reasons, isn't allowed to
stay in the next room. It gets yanked back to this room.</p>

<p>Well, that's a possible explanation. And in a moment, I'll ask
whether it's the best possible explanation, but before we do turn to
that question, there is an objection to this entire way of looking at
things that's probably worth pausing for a moment and considering. The
objection is similar to the kind of dismissive attitude that we saw at
the beginning of the course about the question, "Could I survive my
death?" Well, duh. Could there be life after there is no more life?
Well, of course not.</p>

<p>Here the objection says, this two-room notion's got to be mistaken.
It can't be that what's going on in near-death experiences is that
people are reporting about what it's like to be dead because--so the
objection says--they never really died. After all, 20 minutes later, or
whatever it is, there they are up and about. Well, not up and about;
they're presumably lying in their hospital beds, but they're clearly
alive. Hence, it follows that they never really died. Or, if you want,
you could say maybe they died, but since they obviously didn't die
permanently--after all they were brought back to life--how could they
possibly tell us what it's like to be permanently dead? How can we take
their experiences as veridical reports of the afterlife? Because what
we want to know is what is like to be permanently dead, and these
people were never permanently dead. So whatever unusual experiences
they may be having, they are not reports of the afterlife. That's how
the objection goes.</p>

<p>Although, I think, I was pausing for a moment to raise that
objection, it's not an objection that I think we should take all that
seriously. Suppose we were to agree, all right, strictly speaking these
people didn't die. Or strictly speaking they didn't die, certainly at
least, permanently. Does it follow from that that their experiences
should not be taken as evidence of what the afterlife is like? I think
that's really a misguided objection. Suppose somebody said, "Look, I
spent 20 years living in France, and then I came back to the United
States. And so I want to tell you what it's like in France." And
somebody says, "You know, you never really moved to France permanently.
So your experiences in France, whatever they are--interesting as they
may be--can't really cast any light on what it would be like to
permanently move to France. You'd say, "Give me a break!" Right? "It's
true that, of course, I didn't move to France permanently. Still, I
have some experience of France. And so I can--a great deal after all,
20 years--I can give you a pretty good idea of what it's like to live
in France, even if I didn't move there for the rest of my life without
ever coming back." You can't say quite as much if you've only been in
France for a couple of days before coming back, but still you can say
something relevant.</p>

<p>Indeed, suppose I never went into France at all. Suppose all that
happened was I stood right on the border and peered into France, talked
to some people in France. They were on the French side of the border, I
was on the other side, but I talked to them for a while. Still, I never
went in, but for all that I might have something helpful to say about
what it's like in France. Well, if that's the right thing to say about
the France case, then why not say the same thing about the near-death
experience case? Even if these people didn't stay in the second room,
they didn't stay dead, they had some experience of being dead. Isn't
that relevant to what it would be like to be dead? Or even if we say,
"No. Strictly speaking, these people didn't die at all. They were just
on the border looking in. They never, strictly speaking, died at all."
So what? They were on the border looking in. To suggest that that
couldn't be relevant evidence is like saying I can't tell you anything
interesting about what's going on in the hallway right now, because
after all I'm not in the hallway; I'm here in the lecture hall. So
what? Even though I'm here in the lecture hall, I can see into the
hallway and tell you what's going on in it.</p>

<p>So attempts to dismiss the appeal to near-death experiences on what
we might call philosophical grounds--this would be the bad notion of
philosophy--on philosophical grounds, I think that's got to be
misguided. Still, that doesn't mean that we should believe the argument
for the existence of the soul from near-death experiences, because the
question remains, "What's the best explanation of what's going on in
near-death experiences?" Now, one possibility, as I suggested, was what
I called a second ago the "two-room explanation." There's the room of
this life, and there's the room of the next life and people who have
near-death experiences either temporarily were in the second room or
else at least they were glancing into the second room. That's one
possible explanation. But of course, there's a different possible
explanation--the one-room explanation. There's just life, this life,
and as you come very close to the wall of the room, things end up
looking and seeming and feeling rather different than they do in the
middle of the room.</p>

<p>Now, maybe the one-room metaphor is not the best metaphor, because
it immediately prompts the question, "Well, what's on the other side of
the wall?" And of course, the physicalist's suggestion is there isn't
anything on the other side of the wall. So maybe a better way to talk
about it would just be: Life's a biological process; we're all familiar
with that process, sort of, in its middle stretches. In its closing
stretches, some fairly unusual biological processes kick in. In rare,
but not unheard of, cases, some people begin to have those unusual
biological processes and then return to the normal biological processes
and can talk about what was happening in the unusual biological
processes. Which is just to say, we need to offer a biological/physical
explanation of what goes on in near-death experiences.</p>

<p>Now, mind you, that's not yet to offer the physical explanation;
it's just a promissory note. We now have two rival explanations, the
soul, dualist, explanation that we went into the other world and the
physicalist, promissory note that we can explain the white lights and
the feeling of euphoria and seeing your body from a distance in
physical terms. We don't really have very much of a physical
explanation until we begin to offer scientific accounts of each of
those aspects of near-death experience. But this is, in fact, an area
on which scientists work. And you saw some of the beginnings of an
explanation offered in the reading by Schick and Vaughn. So, for
example, when the body is in stress, as would likely happen toward the
end of the biological processes, when the body is in stress, certain
endorphins get released by the body. Perhaps that explains the feelings
of euphoria. When the body is in stress, we have various unusual
stimulations of the visual sections of the brain, and perhaps that
explains the white light or the feeling of compression in the
tunnel.</p>

<p>Now, again, I'm not any kind of scientist and so I'm not in any
position to say, "Look, here are the details of the explanation." But
you get the beginnings of that sketched in the readings, and it's a
judgment call you've got to make. Does it seem more plausible that we
can explain these experiences in terms of the traumatic stress that
your body and brain is going through when you are near dying? Or is it
more plausible to suggest, "No. What's happened here is a soul has been
released from connection with the body." For my money, I find the
beginnings of the scientific explanation sufficiently persuasive and
sufficiently compelling that I don't find the argument from near-death
experience--as an argument for the existence of a soul--I don't find it
especially persuasive.</p>

<p>Of course, there are various other things we could appeal to in
terms of supernatural occurrences, right? I've only mentioned--only
discussed now in detail--one of them. But there are a variety of things
about people who can communicate from the dead or ghosts or sÃ©ances or
what have you. And what the physicalist would need to do for each one
of those--For each one of those you can imagine a dualist who says, "We
need to believe in a soul so as to explain sÃ©ances. How do we explain
the fact that the person who's conducting the sÃ©ance knows things
about, your history that only your dead uncle would know?" The dualist
can explain that by appealing to ghosts and the like.</p>

<p>How does the physicalist explain things like that? Short answer is,
I don't know. I'm not the kind of person who makes it his business to
try to explain away those things in physicalist, naturalistic,
materialistic, scientific terms. But there are people who make it their
business. So, for example, there's a magician--The question is not,
could I explain to you how the sÃ©ance manages to do the amazing things
that it does? You're wasting your time asking somebody like me. The
person to ask is a magician, somebody whose profession it is to fool
people and make it look like they can do things with magic. So in fact,
there are professional magicians who make it their business to debunk
people who claim to genuinely be in contact with the dead and the like.
There's a magician, I think his name is The Amazing Randi, who has a
sort of standing offer; he says, "You show me what happened in the
sÃ©ance or in communication with the dead or what have you, and I'll
show you how to do it. I'll debunk it for you." Spoiler alert. And he
has a standing offer, he says, "I'll pay whatever the amount is,
$10,000 to the first person who can document some effect done in
supernatural terms that I can't reproduce through trickery." So far
he's never had to pay out.</p>

<p>Well again, that doesn't prove the dualist is wrong. It could be
that there are genuine sÃ©ances. It could be that there really are
ghosts. It could be that there really is communication from the dead.
As is typically the case, you've got to decide for yourself what
strikes you as the better explanation. Is the supernatural, dualist
explanation the more likely one? Or is the physicalist explanation the
more likely one?</p>

<p>Look, you have a dream where your dead mother has come back to talk
to you. One possible explanation, the dualist, that's the ghost of your
mother, immaterial soul that she is, communicating to you while you're
asleep. Second possible explanation, it's just a dream. Of course you
dream about your mother because your unconscious cares about her.
What's the better explanation? We don't have the time here to go case,
by case, by case, and ask ourselves, "How does the evidence fall down
one side versus the other?" But when I review the evidence, I come away
thinking there's no good reason to move beyond the physical.</p>

<p>So again, let's recap. One group of arguments for the existence of a
soul says, "We need to posit a soul in order to explain something,
whether it's something everyday or something supernatural." The
existence of a soul would be the beginnings of a possible explanation.
But the question is never, "Is that a possible explanation?" but, "Is
it the best explanation?" And when I review these various arguments, I
come away thinking the better explanation falls with the physicalist.
Mind you, I don't want to deny that there are some things the
physicalist has not yet done a very compelling job of explaining. In
particular, as I've mentioned previously, I think there are mysteries
and puzzles about the nature of consciousness, the qualitative aspect
of experience, what it's like to smell coffee or taste pineapple or see
red. It's very hard to see how you explain that in physicalist terms.
So to that extent, I think we can say the jury may still be out. But I
don't think what we should say is, "The better explanation lies with
the dualist." Because I think positing a soul doesn't really yet offer
us the explanation. It just holds out the promise of an explanation. So
at best that's a tie, and hence, no compelling reason to accept the
existence of a soul.</p>

<p>It would be one thing if we could see that no conceivable
physicalist explanation could possibly work. But I don't think we're in
that situation. All we're in right now is, perhaps in existence of that
with regard to consciousness, maybe some other things, we don't yet see
how to explain it. But not yet seeing how to explain it is not the same
thing as seeing that it can't be explained on physicalist terms. Of
course, again, if we had a dualist explanation with some details really
worked out, maybe we'd have to say, "Look, this is the better
explanation." But dualism doesn't so much offer the explanation
typically as just say, "Well, maybe we'd be better off positing
something immaterial." That, I think, is not a very compelling
argument.</p>

<p>Well, let's ask. What other kinds of arguments could be offered for
the existence of a soul? I want to emphasize the point that the various
arguments that I have been talking about so far, although they have
this common strand--"inference to the best explanation"--are each
separate and distinct arguments. One of them might work even though the
other ones don't work. But I want to turn now to a rather different
kind of argument.</p>

<p>The argument I'm about to sketch is a purely philosophical argument,
not really so much a matter of who can explain this or that feature of
us better than anybody else. It's an argument that doesn't seem to have
any empirical premises; it works from purely armchair philosophical
reflection. And the striking thing is that many people find this a
pretty compelling argument. The argument I'm going to give traces back
to Descartes, the great early modern philosopher. Well, I'm not going
to follow the details of this argument, but the basic idea goes back to
Descartes. And it starts by asking you to imagine a story.</p>

<p>So I'm going to tell the story in the first person. I'm going to
tell about myself, but you know, you'll find the argument sort of,
perhaps more persuasive if, as I tell the story, you imagine the story
being told about you. So each one of you should translate this into a
story about yourself. You know, your morning. So this is a story about
my morning. Imagine--this didn't, of course, actually happen, but
imagine--the crucial point here is simply that we can imagine this
story happening, not even that we think it's empirically possible, just
it's conceivable, it's an imaginable story. All right.</p>

<p>So suppose that I woke up this morning, that is to say, at a certain
point I look around my room and I see the familiar sights of my
darkened bedroom. I hear, perhaps, the sounds of the cars outside my
house, my alarm clock ringing, what have you. I move out of the room
toward the bathroom, planning to brush my teeth. As I enter the
bathroom, it's much more light, I look in the mirror and--here's where
things get really weird--I don't see anything. Normally, of course,
when I look in the mirror I see my face. I see my head; I see the
reflection of my torso. But now, as I'm looking into the mirror, I
don't see anything at all. Instead, I see the shower reflected behind
me. Normally, that's blocked of course by me, by my body. But I don't
see my body. Slightly freaked out, I reach for my head, or perhaps we
should say I reach for where I would expect my head to be, but I don't
feel anything there. Glancing down at my arms, I don't see any arms.
Now, I'm really panicking. As I begin trying to touch my body, I don't
feel anything. I don't--Not only can't I feel anything with my fingers,
I don't have any sensations where my body should be.</p>

<p>Now, we could continue this story, but I've probably said enough for
you to grant that what I've just started doing--a novelist could do a
better job of telling the story than I just did--but what I've just
done was basically imagine--I've imagined a story in which I discover
that my body doesn't exist. Or I've imagined a story in which my body
has perhaps ceased to exist, or I've imagined a story in which I exist,
or at least my mind exists. You know, I'm thinking thoughts like, "Why
can't I see my body in the mirror? Why can't I feel my head? What's
going on?" I'm panicking, right? We've got a story in which I'm
thinking all sorts of thoughts; my mind clearly exists, and yet, for
all that, my body does not exist. We could--certainly it seems--imagine
that possibility. Now, the brilliant thing about this argument is it
goes from that to a conclusion about there being a difference between
my mind and my body.</p>

<p>What we've just done, after all, is imagine that my mind exists but
my body does not. Now, what does that show? Descartes says what it
shows is the mind and the body must be two logically distinct things.
The mind and the body cannot be the same thing. Because, after all,
what I just did was imagine my mind existing without my body. How could
I even do that, even in imagination? How could it even be possible to
imagine my mind without my body, if talking about my mind is just a way
of talking about my body? If they're really, bottom line,
metaphysically speaking, the same thing, then you couldn't have one
without the other after all. So here's a podium. Try to tell a story in
which this podium exists but this podium does not exist. You can't do
it, right? The podium is just one thing, the podium. And if it is just
one thing, you could tell a story in which it exists; you could tell a
story in which it doesn't exist. But you can't tell a story in which it
exists and doesn't exist.</p>

<p>If I can tell a story in which A exists and B doesn't exist, it's
got to follow that A and B are not the same thing. Because if B was
just another word for, another way of talking about, A, then to imagine
A existing but B not existing would be imagining A existing but--well,
B is just A--A not existing. But of course, you can't imagine a world
in which A exists but A doesn't exist. Put the same point the other way
around: If I can imagine A without B, then A and B have to be logically
distinct things. They cannot be identical. But since I can imagine my
mind existing without my body, it follows that my mind and my body have
to be logically distinct things. They cannot be identical. My mind
cannot just be a way of talking. Talking about my mind cannot just be a
way of talking about my body.</p>

<p>Now, it's a very cool argument. You know, philosophers love this
argument. And I've got to tell you, to this day there's a debate in the
philosophical community about whether or not this argument works. It's
one thing to be clear--a couple of things to be clear about. What
exactly is this argument not doing? The argument is not saying, "If
something is possible, if I can imagine it, it's true." No. I can
imagine unicorns. It doesn't mean unicorns exist. That's not what the
argument is saying. The argument is only making a much more specific
claim. If I can imagine one thing without the other, they must be
separate things. Now, of course, it could still be that in the real
world the one thing cannot exist without the other. There may be some
sort of metaphysical laws that tie the two things so tightly together
that you'll never actually get one without the other. That's not the
question. The point is just if I can at least imagine the one thing
without the other, they must in fact be two separate things. Because if
there was really just one thing there, you couldn't imagine it without
it. Since I can imagine my mind without my body, it must be the case
that my mind is something separate and distinct from my body.
Otherwise, how could I imagine it existing without the body? If they
were the same thing, I couldn't--I can't imagine the body existing
without the body. If the mind is just a way of talking about the body,
how could I imagine the mind without the body? Since I can imagine the
mind without the body, it follows that they're separate. So the mind is
not the body after all. It's something different. It's the soul.</p>

<p>Is that a good argument or not? That's where we'll start next
time.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<p>---<br />
<br />
<b>References</b></p>

<p>Schick, Theodore and Lewis Vaughn. "Near-Death Experiences." In
<i>How to Think About Weird Things</i>. New York: McGraw Hill, 2005.
pp. 307-323<br />
<br />
<br />
</p>
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
