
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 7 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">February 6, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> We've begun to turn to Plato's
dialogue <i>Phaedo</i>, and what I started doing last time was
sketching the basic outlines of Plato's metaphysics--not so much to
give a full investigation of that--clearly we're not going to do that
here--but just to provide enough of the essential outlines of Plato's
metaphysical views so that we can understand the arguments that come up
later in the <i>Phaedo</i>, basically all of which or many of which
presuppose something--certain central aspects about Plato's
metaphysical views.</p>

<p>The key point behind his metaphysics then was the thought that, in
addition to the ordinary empirical physical world that we're all
familiar with, we have to posit the existence of a kind of second
realm, in which exist the Platonic--as they're nowadays called--the
Platonic forms or Platonic ideas. The sort of thing that perhaps we
might call or think of as abstract objects or abstract properties. And
the reason for positing these things is because we're clearly able to
think about these ideas, and yet, we recognize that the ordinary
physical world--although things may participate in them to varying
degrees--we don't actually come across these objects or entities in the
physical world. So that we can talk about things being beautiful to
varying degrees, but we never come across beauty itself in the actual
empirical world. We are able to talk about the fact that two plus one
equals three, but it's not as though we ever come across
numbers--number three itself--anywhere in the empirical world.</p>

<p>A further point that distinguishes the empirical world from
this--this realm of Platonic ideal objects--is that indeed
they--there's something perfect about them. They don't change. In
contrast, physical objects are constantly changing. Something might be
short at one point and become tall at another point, ugly at one point
and become beautiful--like the ugly duckling. It starts out ugly and
becomes a beautiful swan. In contrast, justice itself never changes.
Beauty itself never changes. We have the thought that these things are
eternal, and indeed, beyond change, in contrast to the empirical world.
In fact, if you start thinking more about the world from this
perspective, the world we live in is crazy. It's almost insanely
contradictory.</p>

<p>Plato thinks of it as crazy in the way that a dream is. When you're
caught up in the dream, you don't notice just how insane it all is. But
if you step back and reflect on it, "Well, let's see, I was eating a
sandwich and suddenly the sandwich was the Statue of Liberty, except
the Statue of Liberty was my mother. And she's flying over the ocean,
except she's really a piece of spaghetti." That's how dreams are. And
when you're in it, it sort of all makes sense. Right? You're kind of
caught up, but you step back and say, "That's just insane." Well, Plato
thinks that the empirical world has something of that kind of insanity,
something of that kind contradictoriness, built into it that we don't
ordinarily notice. "He's a basketball player, so he's really, really
tall, except he's only six feet. So he's really, really short for a
basketball player. This is a baby elephant, so it's really, really
big--except it's a baby elephant, so it's really, really small."</p>

<p>The world is constantly rolling--this is a Platonic
expression--rolling between one form and the other. And it's hard to
make sense of. In contrast, the mind is able to grasp the Platonic
ideas, the Platonic forms; and they're stable, they're reliable, they
are--they're law-like and we can grasp them. They don't change; they're
eternal. That's, as I say, the Platonic picture.</p>

<p>Now, it's not my purpose here to try to argue for or against
Platonism with regard to abstract entities. As I suggested in talking
about the example of math last time, it's not a silly view, even if
it's not a view that we all take automatically. But in thinking about
math, most of us are inclined to be Platonists. We all do believe
something makes it true that two plus one equals three, but it's not
the fact that empirical objects--We don't do empirical experiments to
see whether two plus one equals three. Rather, we think our mind can
grasp the truths about numbers. Plato thought everything was like that.
Well, I'm not going to argue for and against that view--just wanted to
sketch it, so as to understand the arguments that turn on it.</p>

<p>So for our purposes, let's suppose Plato was right about that and
ask, what follows? Well, Plato thinks what's going to follow is that we
have some reason to believe in the immortality of the soul as, again,
as we indicated last time, the picture is that the mind--the soul--is
able to grasp these eternal Platonic forms, the ideas. Typically, we're
distracted from thinking about them by the distractions provided by the
body--the desire for food, drink, sex, what have you, sleep. But by
distancing itself from the body, the mind, the soul, is able to better
concentrate on the forms. And if you're good at that, if you practice
while you're alive, separating yourself from the body, then when your
body dies, the mind is able to go up to this Platonic heavenly realm
and commune with gods and other immortal souls and think about the
forms. But if you've not separated yourself from the body while in
life, if you're too enmeshed in its concerns, then upon the death of
your body your soul will get sucked back in, reincarnated perhaps, in
another body. If you're lucky, as another person; if you're not so
lucky, as a pig or a donkey or an ant or what have you.</p>

<p>So your goal, Plato says, your goal should be, in life, to practice
death--to separate yourself from your body. And because of this,
Socrates, who's facing death, isn't distressed at the prospect, but
happy. He's happy that the final separation will take place and he'll
be able to go to heaven.</p>

<p>The dialogue ends, of course, with the death scene--Socrates has
been condemned to death by the Athenians, and it ends with his drinking
the hemlock, not distressed but rather sort of joyful. And the dialogue
ends with one of the great moving death scenes in western civilization
and as Plato says--let's get the quote here exactly right--"Of all
those we have known, he was the best and also the wisest and the most
upright."</p>

<p>Just before the death scene, there's a long myth, which I draw your
attention to but I don't want to discuss in any kind of detail. Plato
says it's a story; it's a myth. He's trying to indicate that there are
things that we can't really know in a scientific way but we can
glimpse. And the myth has to do with these sort of pictures I was just
describing where we don't actually live on the surface of the Earth of
in the light, but rather live in certain hollows in the dark where
we're mistaken about the nature of reality. Some of you who are maybe
familiar with Plato's later dialogue <i>The Republic</i> may recognize
at least what seems to me, what we have here, is a foreshadowing of the
myth of the cave, or the allegory of the cave, which Plato describes
there as well.</p>

<p>Our concern is going to be the arguments that make up the center of
the dialogue. Because in the center of the dialogue, before he dies,
Socrates is arguing with his friends. Socrates is saying, "Look, I'm
not worried. I'm going to live forever." And his disciples and friends
are worried whether this is true or not. And so the heart of the
dialogue consists of a series of arguments in which Socrates attempts
to lay out his reasons for believing in the immortality of the soul.
And that's going to be our concern. What I'm going to do is basically
run through my attempt to reconstruct--my attempt to lay out the basic
ideas from this series of four or five arguments that Plato gives us.
I'm going to criticize them. I don't think they work, though I want to
remark before I turn to them that in saying this I'm not necessarily
criticizing Plato. As we'll see, some of the later arguments seem to be
deliberately aimed at answering objections that we can raise to some of
the earlier arguments. And so it might well be that Plato himself
recognized that the initial arguments aren't as strong as they need to
be.</p>

<p>Plato wrote the dialogues as a kind of learning device, as a tool to
help the reader get better at doing philosophy. They don't necessarily
represent in a systematic fashion Plato's worked out axiomatic views
about the nature of philosophy. It could be that Plato's deliberately
putting mistakes in earlier arguments so as to encourage you to think
for yourself, "Oh, this is--here's a problem with this argument.
There's an objection with that argument." Some of these, Plato then may
address later on. But whether or not he does address them--we're not
doing Plato any honor, we're not doing him any service, if we limit
ourselves to simply trying to grasp, here's what Plato thought. We
could do the history of ideas and say, "Here's Plato's views. Aren't
they interesting? Notice how they differ from Aristotle's views. Aren't
they interesting?" and move on like that. But that's not what the
philosophers wanted us to do. The great philosophers had arguments that
they were putting forward to try to persuade us of the truths of their
positions. And the way you show respect for a philosopher is by taking
those arguments seriously and asking yourself, do they work or not? So
whether or not the views that are being put forward in Socrates' mouth
are the considered, reflective judgments of Plato or not, for our
purposes we can just act as though they were the arguments being put
forward by Plato, and we can ask ourselves, "Do these arguments work or
don't they?"</p>

<p>So I'm going to run through a series of these arguments. I'm going
to, as I've mentioned before, be a bit more exegetical than is normally
the case for our readings. I'm going to actually pause, periodically
look at my notes and make sure I'm remembering how I think Plato
understands the arguments. Of course, since the dialogue is indeed a
dialogue, we don't always have the arguments laid out with a series or
premises and conclusions. And so it's always a matter of
interpretation, what's the best reconstruction of the argument he's
gesturing towards. How can we turn it into an argument with premises
and conclusions? Well, that's what I'm going to try to do for us. Also
going to give the arguments names. These are not names that Plato
gives, but it will make it easy for us to get a fix, roughly, on the
different arguments as we move from one to the next.</p>

<p>So the first argument, and the worry that gets the whole things
going, is this. So, we've got this nice Platonic picture where Plato
says, "All right. So the mind can grasp the eternal forms, but it has
to free itself from the body to do that." And so, the philosopher, who
has sort of trained himself to separate his mind from his body, to
disregard his bodily cravings and desires--the philosopher will welcome
death because at that point he'll truly, finally, make the final break
from the body.</p>

<p>And the obvious worry that gets raised in the dialogue at this point
is this: How do we know that when the death of the body occurs the soul
doesn't get destroyed as well? That's the natural worry to have. Maybe
what we need to do is separate ourselves as much as possible from the
influence of our body without actually going all the way and breaking
the connection. If you think about it like a rubber band, maybe the
more we can stretch the rubber band the better; but if you stretch too
far and the rubber band snaps, that's not good, that's bad. It could be
that we need the body in order to continue thinking. We want to free
ourselves from the distractions of the body, but we don't want the body
to die, because when the body dies the soul dies as well. Even if we
are dualists, as we've noticed before--even if the soul is something
different from the body--it could still be the case, logically
speaking, that if the body gets destroyed, the soul gets destroyed as
well.</p>

<p>And so, Socrates' friends ask him, how can we be confident that the
soul will survive the death of the body and indeed be immortal? And
that's what prompts the series of arguments.</p>

<p>Now, the first such argument I dub "the argument from the nature of
the forms." And the basic thought is fairly straightforward. The ideas
or the forms--justice itself, beauty itself, goodness itself--the forms
are not physical objects. Right? We don't ever bump into justice
itself. We bump into societies that may be more or less just, or
individuals who may be more or less just, but we never bump into
justice itself. The number three is not a physical object. Goodness
itself is not a physical object. Perfect roundness is not a physical
object. Now, roughly speaking, Socrates' seems to think it's going to
follow straightforwardly from that that the soul must itself be
something non-physical. If the forms are not physical objects, then
Socrates thinks it follows they can't be grasped. We can certainly
think about the forms, but if they're non-physical they can't be
grasped by something physical like the body. They've got to be grasped
by something non-physical--namely, the soul.</p>

<p>But although that's, I think, the sketch of where Socrates wants to
go, it doesn't quite give us what we want. On the one hand, even if it
were true that the soul must be non-physical in order to grasp the
non-physical forms, wouldn't follow that the soul will survive the
death of the body. That's the problem we've been thinking about for the
last minute. And there's something puzzling. We might wonder, well,
just why is it that the body can't grasp the forms?</p>

<p>So there's a fuller version of the argument that's the one I want to
focus on. And indeed, I put it up on the board. [See Figure 7.1] So
Platonic metaphysics gives us premise number one--that ideas, forms,
are eternal and they're non-physical. Two--that which is eternal or
non-physical can only be grasped by the eternal and the non-physical.
Suppose we had both of those. It would seem to give us three, the
conclusion we want--that which grasps the ideas or the forms must be
eternal or non-physical.</p>

<p>What is it that grasps the ideas or the forms? Well, that's the
soul. If that which grasps the ideas or the forms must be
eternal/non-physical, well one thing we're going to get is, since that
which grasps the forms must be non-physical, the soul is not the body.
Since that which grasps the ideas or forms must be eternal or
non-physical--it's eternal, it's immortal.</p>

<p>All right. Let's look at this again more carefully. Ideas or forms
are eternal; they're non-physical. Well, I've emphasized the
non-physical aspect, and I've emphasized as well that they're not
changing. But perhaps it's worth taking a moment to emphasize the
eternal aspect of the forms. Now, people may come and go, but perfect
justice--the idea of perfect justice--that's timeless. Nothing that
happens here on Earth can change or alter or destroy the number three.
Two plus one equaled three before there were people; two plus one
equals three now; two plus one will always equal three. The number
three is eternal, as well as being non-physical. So the Platonic
metaphysics says quite generally, if we're thinking about the ideas or
the forms, the point to grasp is they're eternal; they're
non-physical.</p>

<p>The crucial premise--since we're giving Plato number one--the
crucial premise for our purposes is premise number two. Is it or isn't
it true that those things which are eternal or non-physical can only be
grasped by something that is itself eternal and non-physical? Again, it
does seem as though the conclusion that he wants, number three, follows
from that. If we give him number two, it's going to follow that
whatever's doing the grasping--call that the soul since the soul is
just Plato's word for our mind--if whatever's doing the grasping of the
eternal and non-physical forms must itself be eternal and non-physical,
it follows that the soul must be non-physical. So the physicalist view
is wrong and the soul must be eternal. The soul is immortal. So
Socrates has what he wants, once we give him premise number two, that
the eternal, non-physical can only be grasped by the eternal,
non-physical.</p>

<p>As Socrates puts it at one point, "The impure cannot attain the
pure." Bodies--corruptible, destroyable, physical, passing--whether
they exist or not, whether they exist for a brief period and then they
cease to exist--these impure objects cannot attain, cannot grasp,
cannot have knowledge of the eternal, changeless non-physical forms.
"The impure cannot attain the pure."</p>

<p>That's the crucial premise, and what I want to say is, as far as I
can see there's no good reason to believe number two. Now, number two
is not an unfamiliar--premise number two is not an unfamiliar claim. I
take it the claim basically is that, to put it in more familiar
language, it takes one to know one. Or to use it, slightly other kind
of language that Plato uses at various points, "Likes are known by
likes." But it takes one to know one is probably the most familiar way
of putting the point. Plato's saying, "What is it that we know? Well,
we know the eternal forms; takes one to know one. So we must ourselves
be eternal."</p>

<p>Unfortunately, this thought, popular as it may be, that it takes one
to know one, just seems false. Think about some examples. Well, let's
see, a biologist might study, or a zoologist might study, cats. Takes
one to know one, so the biologist must himself be a cat. Well, that's
clearly false. You don't have to be feline to study the feline. Takes
one to know one; so, you can't be a Canadian and study Mexicans,
because it takes one to know one. Well, that's just clearly stupid. Of
course the Canadians can study the Mexicans and the Germans can study
the French. It does not take one to know one; to understand the truths
about the French, you do not yourself need to be French. Or take the
fact that some doctors study dead bodies. Aha! So to study and grasp
things about dead bodies, corpses, you must yourself be a dead body.
No, that certainly doesn't follow. So if we start actually pushing
ourselves to think about examples--does it really take one to know
one--the answer is, at least as a general claim, it's not true. It
doesn't normally take one to know one.</p>

<p>Now, strictly speaking, that doesn't prove that premise two is
false. It could still be that, although normally you don't have to be
like the thing that you're studying in order to study it, although
that's not normally true, it could be that in the particular case of
non-physical objects, in the particular case of eternal objects, you do
have to be eternal, non-physical to study them. It could be that even
though the general claim, "it takes one to know one" is false, the
particular claim, "eternal, non-physical can only be grasped by the
eternal, non-physical," maybe that particular claim is true. And it's
only the particular claim that Plato needs. Still, all I can say is,
why should we believe two? Why should we think there's some--Even
though, normally, the barrier can be crossed and Xs can study the
non-X, why should that barrier suddenly become un-crossable in the
particular instance when we're dealing with Platonic forms? Give us
some reason to believe premise two. I can't see any good reason to
believe premise two, and as far as I can see, Plato doesn't actually
give us any reason to believe it in the dialogue. Consequently, we have
to say, as far as I can see, we haven't been given any adequate
argument for the conclusion that the soul--which admittedly can think
about forms and ideas--we have no good reason yet to believe, to be
persuaded, that the soul must itself be eternal and non-physical.
That's the first argument.</p>

<p>As I say though, Plato may well recognize the inadequacy of that
argument, because after all Socrates goes on to offer a series of other
arguments. So let's turn to the next. I call the second argument "the
argument from recycling"--not the best label I suppose, but I've never
been able to come up with a better one. And the basic idea is that
parts get re-used. Things move from one state to another state and then
back to the first state. So, for example, to give an example that Plato
actually gives in the dialogue, we are all awake now, but previously we
were asleep. We went from being in the realm of the asleep to being in
the realm of the awake, and we're going to return from the realm of the
awake back to the realm of the asleep and over and over and over again.
Hence, recycling. I think that actually a better example for Plato's
purposes, not that I expect him to have this particular example, but,
would be a car. Cars are made up of parts that existed before the car
itself existed. There was the engine and the steering wheel and the
tires and so forth. And these parts got assembled and put together to
make up a car. So the parts of the car existed prior to the existence
of the car itself. And the time is going to come when the car will
cease to exist but its parts will still be around. Right? It'll get
taken apart for parts, sold for parts. There will be the distributor
cap, and there will be the tires, and there will be the carburetor,
there will be the steering wheel. Hence, the name, that I dub the
argument, "the argument from recycling."</p>

<p>That's the nature of reality for Plato. And it seems like a
plausible enough view. Things come into being by being composed of
previously existing parts. And then, when those things cease to have
the form they had, the parts get used for other purposes. They get
recycled. If we grant that to Plato, he thinks we've got an argument
for the immortality of the soul. Because after all, what are the parts
that make us up? Well, there are the various parts of our physical
body, but there's also our soul. Remember, as I said, in introducing
the <i>Phaedo</i>, Plato doesn't so much argue for the existence of
something separate, the soul, as presuppose it. His fundamental concern
is to try to argue for the immortality of the soul. So he's just
helping himself to the assumption that there is a soul. It's one of the
parts that makes us, that goes up into making us up, goes into making
us up. It's one of the pieces that constitutes us. Given the thesis
about recycling, then, we have reason to believe the soul will continue
to exist after we break. Even after our death, our parts will continue
to exist. Our body continues to exist even after our death. Our soul
will continue to exist.</p>

<p>Well, there's a problem with the argument from recycling, and it's
this. Even if the recycling thesis shows us that we're made up of
something that existed before our birth and that some kinds of parts
are going to have to exist after our death, we can't conclude that the
soul is one of the parts that's going to continue to exist after our
death.</p>

<p>Consider some familiar facts about human bodies. As we nowadays
know, human bodies are made up of atoms. And it's certainly true that
the atoms that make up my body existed long before my body existed. And
it's certainly true that after my death those atoms are going to
continue to exist. So there's some--and will eventually get used to
make something else. So Plato's certainly right about recycling as a
fundamental truth. The things that make me up existed before, and will
continue to exist after my death.</p>

<p>But that doesn't mean that every part of my body existed before I
was born, and that every part of my body will continue to exist after I
die. Take my heart. My heart is a part of my body. Yet, for all that,
it didn't exist before my body began to exist. It came into existence
as part of, along with, the creation of my body, and it won't continue
to exist, at least not very long, after the destruction of my body.
There'll be a brief period in which, as a cadaver I suppose, my heart
will continue to exist. But eventually my body will decompose. We
certainly wouldn't have any grounds to conclude my heart is immortal,
will exist forever. That just seems wrong. So even though it's true
that some kind of recycling takes place, we can't conclude that
everything that's now a part of me will continue to exist afterwards.
It might not have been one of the parts, one of the fundamental parts,
from which I'm built--like the heart. And if that's right, if there can
be parts that I have now that weren't one of the parts from which I was
made, there's no particular reason to think it's going to be one of the
parts that's going to continue to exist after I die.</p>

<p>Once we see that kind of worry, we have to see, look, the same thing
could be true for the soul. Even if there is an immortal soul--Sorry.
Even if there is a non-physical soul that's part of me, we don't yet
have any reason to believe that it's one of the fundamental building
blocks that were being recycled. We don't have adequate reason to
conclude that it's something that existed before I was put together,
it's something that will be recycled and continue to exist after I fall
apart, after my body decomposes, after I'm separated from my body, or
what have you. Even if recycling takes place, we don't have any good
reason yet to believe that the soul is one of the recycled parts. So it
seems to me "the argument from recycling," as I call it, is not
successful either.</p>

<p>Now, as I say, many times when you read the dialogue, this or other
dialogues by Plato, it seems as though he's fully cognizant of the
objections that at least an attentive reader will raise about earlier
stages of the argument. Because sometimes the best way to understand a
later argument is to see it as responding to the weaknesses of earlier
arguments. And I think that's pretty clearly what's going on in the
very next argument that comes up in the dialogue. The objection I just
raised, after all, to the argument from recycling, said, in effect,
even though some kind of recycling takes place, not all my parts get
recycled, because not all of my parts were among the pre-existing
constituent pieces from which I am built up. We don't have any
particular reason to think my heart's one of the prior-existing pieces;
we don't have any good reason to assume that my soul's one of the
prior-existing pieces.</p>

<p>Well, Plato's very next argument attempts to persuade us that indeed
we do have reason to believe that the soul is one of the prior-existing
pieces. And this argument is known as "the argument from recollection."
The idea is, he's going to tell us certain facts that need explaining,
and the best explanation involves a certain fact about recollecting, or
a certain claim about recollecting or remembering. But we can only
remember, he thinks, in the relevant way if our soul existed before the
birth of our body, before the creation of our body. All right.</p>

<p>What's the crucial fact? Well, let's start by--Plato starts by
telling us, reminding us of what it is to remember something. Or
perhaps a better word would be what is it to be reminded of something
by something else that resembles it but is not the thing it reminds you
of. I might have a photograph of my friend Ruth. And looking at the
photograph reminds me of Ruth. It brings Ruth to mind. I start thinking
about Ruth. I remember various things I know about Ruth. The photograph
is able to do that, is able to trigger these thoughts. But of course,
the photograph is not Ruth. Right? Nobody would--who's thinking
clearly--would confuse the photograph with my friend. But the
photograph resembles Ruth. It resembles Ruth well enough to remind me
of her, and interestingly, it can do that even if it's not a very good
photograph. You might hold up the photograph and I might say, "Gosh,
that really doesn't look very much like Ruth does it?" Even though I
see that it is a photograph of Ruth; it reminds me of her.</p>

<p>Now, how could it be that a photograph reminds me of my friend?
Well, this isn't some deep mystery. Presumably the way it works is, as
I just said, it looks sort of like her. It doesn't have to look very
much like her. It looks sort of like her. Your young brother or sister,
or my little children, can draw pictures of family members that barely
look like family members. My niece drew a picture of my family once
when she was three. It didn't look very much like us at all, but we
could sort of see the resemblance in a vague kind of way, right? So
it's got to look at least somewhat like the missing friend. But that's
not enough. You've never met Ruth, let's suppose. I hold up the
photograph without having told you anything about her. The photograph's
not going to remind you of Ruth. Why not? Well, you don't know Ruth. So
the pieces we need are not only an image of Ruth, even if an imperfect
image of Ruth, we also need some prior acquaintance with Ruth. That's
pretty much what it takes, right? So on the one hand--temporal
sequence--first you know Ruth, you meet Ruth, you get to know Ruth.
Then at a later time you're shown an image of Ruth--maybe not even an
especially good image of Ruth--but good enough to remind you. And
suddenly, you're remembering things you know about Ruth. That's how
recollection works. All right.</p>

<p>Now, Plato points out that we all know things about the Platonic
forms. But the Platonic forms, as we also know, are not to be found in
this world. The number three is not a physical object, perfect
roundness is not a physical object, perfect goodness is not a physical
object. We can think about these things; our mind can grasp them, but
they're not to be found in this world. Yet, various things that we do
find in this world get us thinking about those things. I look at the
plate on my kitchen table, it's not perfectly round, it's got
imperfections; but suddenly I start thinking about circles, perfectly
round objects. I look at somebody who's pretty. He or she is not
perfectly beautiful, but suddenly I start thinking about the nature of
beauty itself. Ordinary objects in the world participate to a greater
or lesser degree in the Platonic forms. That's Plato's picture of
metaphysics. And we bump up against, we look at, we have interactions
with these everyday objects and, somehow, they get us thinking about
the Platonic forms themselves. How does it happen? Plato has a theory.
He says, "These things remind us of the Platonic forms." We see
something that's beautiful to some degree, and it reminds us of perfect
beauty. We see something that's more or less round, and it reminds us
of perfect circularity. We see somebody who's fairly decent morally,
and it reminds us of perfect justice or perfect virtue. It's just like
the photograph, perhaps the not very good photograph, that reminds me
of my friend Ruth.</p>

<p>All right. Well, there's an explanation of how it could be that
things that are not themselves perfectly round could remind us, could
make us think about perfect roundness. But then Plato says, "Okay, but
keep in mind <i>all</i> of what you need in order to have reminding, to
have recollecting take place." In order for the photograph to remind me
of Ruth, I have to already have met Ruth. I have to already be
acquainted with her. In order for a more or less round plate to remind
me of roundness, Plato says, I have to have already met perfect
roundness itself. In order for a more or less just society to remind me
of justice itself, so that I can start thinking about the nature of
justice itself, I have to somehow have already been acquainted with
perfect justice. But how and when did it happen? Not in this life, not
in this world. In this world nothing is perfectly round, nothing is
perfectly beautiful, nothing is perfectly just. So it's got to have
happened before. If seeing the photograph of my friend now can remind
me of my friend, it's got to be because I met my friend before. If
seeing things that participate in the forms remind me of the forms,
it's got to be because I've met or been acquainted directly with the
forms before. But you don't bump up against, you don't meet, you don't
see or grasp or become directly acquainted with, the forms in this
life. So it's got to have happened before this life.</p>

<p>That's Plato's argument. Plato says, thinking about the way in which
we grasp the forms helps us to see that the soul must have existed
before birth, in the Platonic heavenly realm, directly grasping,
directly communing with, directly understanding the forms. It's not
taking place in this life, so it has to have happened before.</p>

<p>Well, look, now we've got the kind of argument we were looking for.
Earlier the objection was, we had no good reason to think the soul was
one of the building blocks from which we're composed; we have no good
reason to think it's one of the pieces that was around before our body
got put together, before our birth. Socrates says, "No. On the
contrary, we do have reason, based on the argument from recollection,
to conclude that the soul was around before we were born."</p>

<p>All right. So the next question is, is the argument from
recollection a good one? Now, let's say, I'm not really much concerned
with whether this was an argument that Plato thought worked or not. Our
question is, do <i>we</i> think it works or not? Although this is a
form of an argument that Plato does put forward in other dialogues as
well, and so it strikes me so there's at least some reason to think
this is an argument that he felt might well be right. The crucial
premise--Again, we're going to just grant Plato the metaphysics. The
crucial question is going to be, is it right that in order to explain
how it is we could have knowledge of the forms now that we have to
appeal to a prior existence in which we had direct acquaintance?</p>

<p>It's not obvious to me that that's true. It's not obvious to me for
a couple of reasons. One question is this: Is it really true that in
order to think about the perfectly straight, I must have somehow,
somewhere at some point come up against, had direct knowledge of, the
perfectly straight? Isn't it enough for me to extrapolate from cases
that I do come up against in this life? I come across things that are
bent; I come across things that are more straight, more and more
straight. Can't my mind take off from there and push straight ahead to
the idea of the perfectly straight, even if I never have encountered it
before?</p>

<p>Let me stop with this idea. Even if Plato is right, that we need to
have acquaintance with the Platonic forms themselves in order to think
about them, and even if Plato is right that we never get the
acquaintance in this world, in the interaction with ordinary physical
objects, why couldn't it be that our acquaintance with the Platonic
forms comes about in this life for the very first time? That's the
question, or that's the objection, that we'll turn to at the start of
next class.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
