
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 6 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">February 1, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> At the end of last class, we started
sketching an argument that comes from Descartes, the Cartesian
argument, that says merely by the process of thinking, on the basis of
thought alone, it tends to show that the mind--We all agree that there
are minds. What the argument attempts to show is that this mind must be
something separate from my body. And what's amazing about the argument
is that it works on the basis of a pure thought experiment. The thought
experiment, you recall, was one in which I imagine, I tell myself a
story in which what I'm doing is I'm imagining my mind existing without
my body. It doesn't seem especially difficult to do that. But then, we
add this extra philosophical premise. If I can imagine one thing
without the other, then it must be that those are two things. So my
mind must not be my body. My mind must not be the same thing as my body
or a way of talking about my body, because of course if my mind just
was--talking about my mind just was--a way of talking about my body,
then to try to imagine my mind without my body would be trying to
imagine my body without my body. And that, obviously, can't happen.</p>

<p>Look. Suppose we try to imagine a world in which Shelly exists but
Kagan doesn't. You can't, right? Because of course, they're just a
single thing, Shelly Kagan. And so if you've imagined Shelly existing
then of course you're imagining that single thing, Shelly Kagan,
existing. And if you imagine Kagan not existing, then you're imagining
that single thing, Shelly Kagan, not existing. So you can't even
imagine a world in which Shelly exists but Kagan doesn't.</p>

<p>Now, it's important not to be confused about this. We can easily
imagine a world in which I don't have the last name Kagan or perhaps to
switch it around, Shelly's not my name. Suppose my parents had named me
Bruce. Nothing would be easier. Imagine a world in which Kagan exists,
but Shelly doesn't exist, because nobody in the world is named
Shelly.</p>

<p>The question is not, "Can you imagine me with a different name?"
Bruce instead of Shelly, easy enough. It's rather, "Can you imagine a
world in which the very thing that you really are picking out when you
refer to me by the name Shelly--namely this thing--can you imagine a
world in which that thing exists, but the thing that you're picking up
when you use the word Kagan does not exist?" And that you can't do,
because in the real world of course Shelly and Kagan pick out just two
different names of this very same thing. This thing right here. So
imagining a world in which Shelly exists but Kagan doesn't or Kagan
exists but Shelly doesn't, that's trying to imagine a world in which I
exist but I don't. And that's, of course, incoherent.</p>

<p>So if you can--On the other hand, contrast. Can I imagine a world in
which my left hand exists, but my right hand doesn't? Easy. Why is it
so easy? Because of course there's two different things. Of course,
that doesn't mean that in the real world one of them does exist and the
other one doesn't. But it does show that in the real world they are two
different things. That's why I could imagine a world with one but not
the other. Try to imagine a world in which somebody's smile exists but
their body doesn't. You can't do it. You can't have the smile without
the body. And of course, no mystery about that. That's because the
smile isn't really some separate thing from the body. Talking about
smiles, as we've noted before, is just a way of talking about either
what the body can do or what a certain area of the body can do.</p>

<p>You can try to imagine it. In <i>Alice in Wonderland</i>, the
Cheshire Cat disappears and all we have left, the last thing that
disappears, is the smile. But of course, when you imagine the Cheshire
Cat only having the smile there, you're still imagining the cat's lips,
teeth, maybe tongue, whatever it is. If you try to imagine a smile with
no body at all, it can't be done. Why? Because the smile isn't
something separate from the body.</p>

<p>"Try to imagine my mind," says Descartes, "without my body." Easy.
From which it follows that my mind and my body must not be one thing.
They must, in fact, be two things. That's why it's possible to imagine
the one without the other.</p>

<p>So this Cartesian argument seems to show us that the mind is
something separate from, distinct from, not reducible to, not just a
way of talking about, my body. So it's got to be something extra above
and beyond my body. It's a soul. That's what Descartes argued. And as I
say, to this day, philosophers disagree about whether this argument
works or not. I don't think it does work and in a second I'll give you
a counter example. And then, having given the counter exampleâ€¦ That is
to say, what I'm going to give is an example of an argument just like
it, or at least an argument that seems to be just like it where we can
pretty easily see that that argument doesn't work. And so something
must go wrong with Descartes' argument as well.</p>

<p>Well, here's the counter example. Some of you, I'm sure most of you,
maybe all of you, are familiar with the Evening Star. The Evening Star
is the, roughly speaking, first heavenly body that's visible in the sky
as it gets dark, at least at certain times of the year. And I'm sure
you're also familiar then with the Morning Star. The Morning Star is
that heavenly body which is the last heavenly body that's still visible
as dawn comes in and it begins to get light. So as a first pass, the
Evening Star is the first star that's visible and the Morning Star is
the last star that's visible at the right times of the year. The world
that we live in has both the Evening Star and the Morning Star. But try
to imagine a world in which the Evening Star exists, but the Morning
Star does not. Seems fairly straightforward, right? I get up in the
morning as dawn's approaching. I look around and the Morning Star is
not there. There is no star where the Morning Star had been or where
people have claimed it would be or something. But the Evening Star
still exists. When I go out as sun sets and dusk falls, there is the
Evening Star.</p>

<p>So, as I say, it's a trivial matter to imagine a world in which the
Evening Star exists and the Morning Star does not. And so we've got
a--we could imagine then a--Descartes-like argument saying, "If I can
imagine the Evening Star without the Morning Star, that shows the
Evening Star and the Morning Star must be two different heavenly
bodies." But in fact, that's not so. The Evening Star and the Morning
Star are the very same heavenly body. In fact, it's not a star at all.
It's a planet. It's Venus, if I recall correctly. So look, there's only
one thing. The Evening Star is Venus. The Morning Star is Venus. So
there couldn't be a world in which the Evening Star exists, but the
Morning Star doesn't, because that would be a world in which Venus
exists and Venus doesn't exist. Obviously, that's not possible.</p>

<p>Of course what you can imagine is a world in which Venus isn't
visible in the morning. Still, that's not a world in which the Morning
Star doesn't exist, given that what we mean by the Morning Star is that
heavenly object, whatever it is, that in this world we pick out at that
time in the morning looking up at the sky. So when I refer to the
Morning Star, I'm talking about Venus, whether or not I realize it's
Venus. When I talk about the Evening Star, I'm referring to Venus,
whether or not I realize that Venus is the Evening Star. So as long as
Venus is around, well, there's the Evening Star, there's the Morning
Star, there's Venus. You can't have a world in which the Morning Star
doesn't exist but the Evening Star does. Although you could have a
world in which Venus doesn't show up in the morning. Still, from the
fact that I can imagine the world in which I look around for the
Morning Star--there it isn't. I look around for the Evening Star--there
it is. You might have thought that showed--didn't Descartes prove to us
that that shows--the Evening Star and the Morning Star are two
different things? Well no, obviously it didn't. So let's think about
what that means.</p>

<p>So we've got this argument that Descartes puts forward. I can
imagine my mind without my body. And Descartes says that shows that, in
fact, my mind is something separate from my body. Well, I can imagine
the Evening Star without the Morning Star, so Son of Descartes,
"Descarteson," has to say, "Oh, so that shows that the Morning Star and
the Evening Star are two different things." But "Descarteson" would be
wrong when he says that. The Morning Star and the Evening Star aren't
two different things. They're just one thing, namely Venus. In fact,
the sentence, "<i>They</i> are one thing," is slightly misleading,
right? It's just one thing, Venus. If that argument, if the
argument--If trying to run the Cartesian argument for astronomy fails,
yet it seems to be an exactly analogous argument, we ought to conclude
that the argument for the distinctness of the mind and the body must
fail as well.</p>

<p>Now, that seems to me to be right. I think the Cartesian argument
does fail. And I think the example of the Evening Star and the Morning
Star--which is not at all original to me--that this example shows, this
counter example shows, that Descartes' original argument doesn't work
either. At least, that's how it seems to me, though as I say, there are
philosophers that say, "No, no. That's not right. Maybe somehow we
misunderstood how the argument goes and it doesn't exactly--although
these two arguments seem parallel, they're not, in fact, parallel.
There's some subtle differences that if we're not looking carefully,
we'll overlook." But, as I say, the debate goes on. One of the reasons
for thinking it's not clear whether the argument fails or not is
because it's hard to pin down, where exactly did it go wrong?</p>

<p>Look, take the argument of the planets, the Morning Star and the
Evening Star example. I take it that we all agree that when we attempt
to run the Cartesian argument in terms of the Morning Star and the
Evening Star, it fails. But it's harder to say what went wrong? How did
it go wrong? Why did it go wrong?</p>

<p>What are the possibilities? Well, we said, look, first claim, first
premise. I can imagine a world in which the Evening Star exists, but
the Morning Star doesn't. Well, I suppose one possible response would
be, "You know, you couldn't really do that. You thought you were
imagining a world in which the Evening Star exists and the Morning Star
doesn't, but you weren't really imagining a world in which the Evening
Star exists and the Morning Star doesn't. You misdescribed what it is
you've imagined." That's not a silly thing to say about the astronomy
case. Maybe that's the right diagnosis.</p>

<p>Could we similarly say, "I didn't really imagine a world in which my
mind exists but my body doesn't"? That little story I told last time, I
thought I was describing a world in which my mind exists and my body
doesn't, but it wasn't really imagining a world like that. That doesn't
seem so persuasive over there. It did seem as though I was imagining
it.</p>

<p>What else could go wrong with the astronomy example? Well, maybe I
did imagine a world in which the Morning Star exists and the Evening
Star doesn't exist, but maybe imagining doesn't mean it's possible.
Normally, we think, if we imagine something, it means it's possible.
Here I don't mean, of course, empirically possible. I could imagine a
world with unicorns. It doesn't mean I think unicorns are physically
possible. All we mean here is logically possible. I can imagine a world
with unicorns. It seems to follow that unicorns are logically possible.
Imagination seems to be a guide to possibility; but maybe not always.
Maybe sometimes we can imagine something that's really impossible. Try
to imagine--can you do that or can you not do that?--try to imagine a
round square. Can you imagine it? Can you not imagine it? In certain
moods, I sort of feel I can just begin to imagine it. Of course, it
doesn't really mean it's possible. It seems like it's impossible. So
maybe imagination is a flawed guide to possibility. So maybe that's
what we should say about the mind-body case. "Yeah, I can imagine a
world in which my mind exists but my body doesn't. But that doesn't
show that it's really possible, logically possible to have a world in
which my mind exists and my body doesn't." Maybe that's where the
argument goes wrong. On the other hand, isn't imagination our best
guide to logical possibility? Isn't the reason I think unicorns are
logically coherent is because I can imagine them so easily?</p>

<p>Another possibility. Maybe we should say, the mere fact that it's
possible for A and B to be separate--for A to exist without B for
example, that's clearly where they're separate--the mere fact that it's
possible for them to be separate doesn't mean that in the actual world
they are separate. Maybe the argument goes wrong by assuming that
identity--when A is equal to B, it's always equal to B, no matter what.
Maybe identity, as philosophers like to put it, maybe identity is
contingent. Maybe A could be the same thing as B in this logically
possible world, but we could imagine a completely different logically
coherent world in which A was not the same thing as B. If that's right,
then maybe the conclusion should be "well, you know, yeah, the
Cartesian thought experiment shows that there could be a world in which
there are minds that are not identical to bodies. But that doesn't mean
that in this world the mind is not identical to my body. Maybe in this
world, minds and bodies are identical, even though in other logically
possible worlds the identity comes apart. Identity is not necessary,
but contingent, as the philosophers put it."</p>

<p>It's not clear that that's right either. The notion of contingent
identity is very puzzling. After all, if A really is B, how could they
come apart? There's only one thing there. There's nothing to come
apart. There's just A equals B, that single thing. What's to come
apart?</p>

<p>So where exactly does the argument break down? Is it that I'm not
really imagining? I'm just thinking I'm imagining? Is it that
imagination's not really a good guide to possibility? I just--Often it
is, but not always. Is it that identity is contingent? The interesting
thing about Descartes' argument is that it's easy to see something has
gone wrong in the case of the Morning Star and the Evening Star, but
it's difficult to pin down what exactly went wrong. Different
philosophers agree that something's gone wrong in the Morning Star and
the Evening Star case, but disagree about the best diagnosis of where
the mistake went in. Armed with your pet diagnosis of where the
argument goes wrong there, you've got to ask, "Does it also go wrong in
the mind and body case?"</p>

<p>Well, we could spend more time, but I'm not going to. I think
Descartes' argument fails. I think the Morning Star, Evening Star case
shows us that arguments like this, at the very least, can't be taken at
face value. Just because it looks as though we can imagine it and just
because it seems as though from the fact that we can imagine one
without the other, it just won't necessarily follow that we really do
have two things that are separate and not identical in the real world.
I'd be happy to discuss with you, outside class, at greater length my
favorite theories as to where the argument goes wrong and why I think
it goes wrong in Descartes' case as well. But I suggest that the
argument goes wrong. It's not right. And so, Descartes' attempt to
establish the distinctness of the mind, the immateriality of the mind,
on the basis of this Cartesian thought experiment, I think that's
unsuccessful.</p>

<p>Well, we've spent--Let's step back and think of where we've been.
We've spent the last week and a half or so, maybe a bit more, two
weeks, talking about arguments for the existence of the soul. And
unsurprisingly--since I announced this was going to be the result
before the class had barely gotten started--I don't think any of these
arguments work. I believe the attempts to establish the existence of a
soul, an immaterial object, the house of consciousness separate and
distinct from the body, I think those arguments fail. But I recognize
that this is something that reasonable people can disagree about. And
so this is, as will be many times the case over the course of this
semester, something that I invite you to continue to reflect on for
yourself. If you believe in a soul, what's the argument for it?</p>

<p>Well, what we're about to turn to is Plato's discussion of these
issues in the dialogue the <i>Phaedo</i>, which, as I told you last
week, purports to lay out the final day's discussion with Socrates
before he is killed by--he kills himself--by drinking the hemlock in
accordance with the punishment that's been given to him. Now, in the
course of this discussion, Socrates and his disciples argue about not
so much the existence of the soul, but the question really is the
immortality of the soul. After all, even if you believe in a soul, as I
have remarked previously, that doesn't give us yet any reason to
believe the soul continues to exist after the death of your body. The
kind of dualist position that we are considering in this class is an
interactionist position, where the soul commands the body. That's what
makes my fingers move right now. And the body can affect the soul. If I
poke my body, I feel it in my mind. So the mind, the soul, and the body
are obviously very tightly connected. And so it could be--even if the
soul is something separate from the body--that when the body dies, the
soul dies as well. That's the question that's driving the discussion in
the <i>Phaedo</i>.</p>

<p>Do we have any good reason to believe the soul survives the death of
the body? And more particularly still, do we have good reason to
believe it's immortal? Socrates believes in the immortality of the
soul. And so, he attempts to defend this position, justify it to his
disciples who are worried that it may not be true. It's important to
realize--as you read the dialogue, it becomes fairly apparent--that
there isn't so much any defense of the belief in the soul. There's some
of it, but it's not the primary goal. For the most part, the existence
of the soul is just taken for granted in the dialogue. Plato, as a
dualist, portrays Socrates as being a dualist and that's just taken for
granted. The question that the philosophical discussion turns on is
not, "Is there a soul?" but rather, "Does it survive the death of the
body? Is it immortal?"</p>

<p>Now, as I said, this is Socrates' last day on earth and you'd expect
him to be pretty bummed. You'd expect him to be sad. And one of the
just striking things is that Socrates is in a very happy, indeed
jovial, mood, joking with his friends. Why is that? Well, of course,
it's because he thinks, first of all, there's a soul and it will
survive and it's immortal. But more importantly still--those are all
crucial but there's an extra ingredient as well--he thinks he's got
good reason to believe, when he dies he's going to go, basically, to
what we'd call heaven. He thinks there's a realm populated by good gods
and maybe other philosophical kindred souls. And if you got your stuff
together here on life, you'll get to go to that when you die. And so
he's excited. He's pleased.</p>

<p>Why does he think he's going to go? Well, in thinking about
Socrates' belief in the existence of a soul, it's important to
understand, it's important to notice, that his take on which stuff gets
assigned to the body, what are the bodily things versus what are the
soul-like things, is rather different from the way, I think, most of us
nowadays would draw the line. When I talked about arguments for the
existence of a soul, I said, "Look, here's one possible argument. I see
colors. No physical object could, no purely physical object could see
colors. I can taste tastes and have the smell of coffee and so forth."
But Socrates thinks all those bodily sensations--that's all stuff that
the body takes care of. So unlike those modern dualists who think we
need to appeal to something immaterial in order to explain bodily
sensations, Socrates thinks no, no, the body takes care of all the
bodily sensations, all the desirings and the wantings and the emotions
and the feelings and the cravings. That's all body stuff.</p>

<p>What the soul does--Socrates thinks--the soul thinks. The soul, in
its essence, is rational. It takes care of the thinking side of things.
What does the soul think about? Well, the soul thinks about all sorts
of things, doubtless. But one of the things that it can do, one of the
things that sort of provides the underpinnings, as we'll see, for
Plato's arguments for the immortality of the soul is the soul can think
about--;well, here I'll have to introduce a word of philosophical
jargon. Sometimes the idea, sometimes the term is called "ideas."
Sometimes the term is called "forms." But the thought is that the soul
can think about certain pure concepts or ideas like justice itself, or
beauty itself, or goodness itself, or health itself. So to explain all
this we need now a sort of crash course in Plato's metaphysics.
Obviously, this will be rather superficial. Those of you who would like
to know more about it, I recommend reading more Platonic dialogues or
taking a class in ancient philosophy. But here's the basic idea.</p>

<p>There's all sorts of beautiful objects in the world. Objects can
vary in terms of how beautiful they are. But Plato's got the idea that
there's nothing in this world that's perfectly beautiful. And yet for
all that, we can think about beauty itself. Well, we might put it this
way. We might say, ordinary, humdrum, everyday, physical objects are
somewhat beautiful. They're partially beautiful. As, sometimes,
Platonists put it, they "participate" in beauty. They partake of beauty
to varying degrees. But none of them should be confused with beauty
itself. Or, take justice. There are various arrangements, social
arrangements, that can be just or unjust to varying degrees. But we
don't think anywhere in the world there's any society that's perfectly
just. Yet for all that, the mind can think about perfect justice. And
notice how ordinary empirical social arrangements fall short of perfect
justice. So whatever perfect justice is, it's not one more thing in the
empirical world. It's something we can think about. It's something that
things in the empirical world can participate in or partake of to
varying degrees. But we shouldn't confuse the physical things which can
be just, the people who can be virtuous to one degree or another, with
perfect virtue or perfect justice. That's something that only the mind
can think about, that we don't actually have in the world, the
empirical world itself.</p>

<p>Or take being round. The mind can think about perfect circularity.
But no physical object is perfectly circular. There are only things
that are circular to a greater or lesser degree. So, by thinking about
it, by thinking about these kinds of issues, we can see that the mind
has some kind of handle on these perfect, well, we need a word. And as
I say, Plato gives us a word, "ideas." Sometimes it's translated as
"ideas" or "forms." These things that we can think about that are the
template, or at least the standard, or maybe at the very least it's
that which the ordinary humdrum things can participate in to varying
degrees: perfect justice, justice itself, beauty itself, goodness
itself, circularity itself, health itself. All of these things are, as
philosophers nowadays call them, Platonic forms. Ordinary material
objects of this world can partake of the various Platonic forms, but
they should not be confused with the Platonic forms. But we still--even
though we don't bump into the Platonic forms in this world--we can
think about them. Our mind has a kind of grasp of them.</p>

<p>Of course, the problem is, we're distracted by the comings and
goings, the hurly burly of the ordinary everyday world. And so we don't
have a very good grasp of the Platonic forms. We're able to think about
them, but we're distracted. What the philosopher tries to do--this is
Socrates' thought, or Plato's thought that he puts in Socrates'
mouth--what the philosopher tries to do is free himself from the
distractions that the body poses--the desire for food, the craving for
sex, being concerned about pain. All this stuff, hungering after
pleasure, all this stuff gets in the way of thinking about the Platonic
forms. What the philosopher tries to do, then, so as to better focus on
these ideal things, is to disregard the body, put it aside, separate
his mind as much as possible from it. That's what Socrates says he's
been trying to do. And so because of that, he's got a better handle on
these ideal forms. And then, he believes, when death comes and the
final separation occurs of the mind and the body, his mind gets to go
up, his soul gets to go up to this heavenly realm. Philosophers
nowadays call it "Plato's heaven." He gets to go up to Plato's heaven
where he can have more direct contact with these things, with the
forms.</p>

<p>Now, I don't have the time here to say enough to try and make it
clear why this Platonic metaphysical view is a view that not only is
worth taking seriously, but to this day, many, many philosophers think
that, at least in it's basic strokes, must be right. But let me at
least give you one example that may give you a feel for it. Think of
math. Think of some simple mathematical claim like 2 + 2 = 4. When we
say that 2 + 2 = 4 or 2 + 3 = 5, we're saying something about numbers
that our mind is able to grasp. But what are numbers anyway? They're
certainly not physical objects. It's not as though someday you're going
to open up an issue of <i>National Geographic</i> where the cover
story's going to be "At long last, explorers have discovered the number
two." It's not as though the number two is something that you see or
hear or taste or could bump into. Whatever the number two is, it's
something that our mind can grasp but isn't actually in the physical
world.</p>

<p>That's the Platonic take on mathematics. There are numbers. The mind
can think about them. Things can partake of them. If I were to hold up
two pieces of paper, there's a sense in which they are participating in
"twohood." But of course, this is not the number two here. If I were to
rip these pieces of paper, I wouldn't be destroying the number two. So
the number two, the numbers, three, whatever it is, whatever they are,
are these Platonic abstract entities that don't exist in space and
time. Yet, for all that, the mind can think about them. That's the
idea. And it's not a silly idea. It seems like a very compelling
account of what's going on in mathematics. What mathematicians are
doing is using their mind to think about these Platonic ideas of
mathematics. Except Plato's thought was, everything is like that. It's
not just math, but justice itself is like that. There are just or
unjust things in the world. The mind can think about them, but justice
itself--this perfect, this idea of being perfectly just--that's
something the mind can think about, but it's not here in the world.
It's another abstract Platonic form.</p>

<p>So that's the picture. Plato's idea is that if we start doing enough
metaphysics, we can see there must be this realm of Platonic ideas,
Platonic forms. And we can see that we are able to grasp them through
the mind. This can't be a job the body does, because the body's only
got its bodily capacities, right? It's able to do the five-senses
thing. It's the soul that thinks about the Platonic forms. And as
Plato's then going to go on to try to argue, given this picture of what
the mind can do, he thinks he can persuade us that the mind, the soul,
not only survives the death of your body, but will last forever. It's
perfect. It's immaterial and can't be destroyed. It's immortal. So he
offers a series of arguments for that conclusion, for that position,
and starting next time, we'll work our way through those arguments.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
