
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 9 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">February 13, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> We've been working our way through
Plato's arguments for the immortality of the soul. And last time I
spent a fair bit of time working through objections to, not quite the
last argument we're going to look at, but the penultimate argument, in
which Plato tries to argue for the simplicity of the soul. The set of
connected ideas, you'll recall, were these: that Plato wants to suggest
that in order to be destroyed you've got to have parts; to destroy
something is to basically take its parts apart. If he could only
convince us that the soul was simple, it would follow that it was
indestructible and, hence, immortal. He asks, what's our evidence for
some things being indestructible? What kinds of things are simple?
Well, these are--he then goes on to claim--invisible things, things
that don't change. After all, changing is a matter of the rearrangement
of the parts. And so, if something can change, it can't be simple.
Maybe it could be destroyed. But if we could become convinced that the
soul was not composite, if it was something that couldn't change, then
it would simple. Perhaps then it would indestructible. And then he goes
on to suggest that the invisibility of the soul is evidence for it's
being changeless, and hence simple, and hence indestructible. So that's
the argument we worked through last time. And I spent a fair bit of
time suggesting that if you pin down precisely what Plato means by
invisible, the argument doesn't actually go through.</p>

<p>Before leaving that argument, there are a couple of extra remarks I
want to make about it. First, we probably shouldn't have been so quick
to want to buy into the suggestion that the soul is changeless. After
all, if you think about it, it seems that at least on the face of it
the soul does indeed change. On one day you believe, for example, that
it's hot; on another day you believe that it's cold. On one day you
believe that so and so is a nice person; on the next day you believe
that so and so is a mean person. You desire to learn the piano, the
next day you give up on that desire. Your beliefs, your goals, your
intentions, your desires--these things are all constantly changing. And
so, at least on the face of it, it looks as though we might well want
to say the soul--if we do believe there are souls--the soul is changing
as well, in terms of what thoughts and beliefs it's housing.</p>

<p>So we should have been skeptical in the first place of any argument
that said, based on the invisibility of the soul, we can conclude that
it's changeless. It doesn't seem to be in fact changeless. Furthermore,
we should be, or at least we might well be, skeptical of the claim that
the soul is simple. Indeed, Plato himself, in other dialogues, argues
against the simplicity of the soul. Now, that doesn't mean he's right
in the other dialogues, but at least suggests that we shouldn't be so
ready to assume that sort of position is correct. In <i>The
Republic</i>, famously, Plato goes on to argue that the soul has at
least three different parts. There's a rational part that's in charge
of reasoning; there's a spirited part that's sort of like the will;
there's a part that has to do with appetite, desires for food, drink,
sex, what have you. Plato elsewhere argues the soul is not simple at
all. So perhaps it shouldn't shock us that the argument he's sketching
here for the simplicity of the soul based on the changeless, invisible
nature of the soul--perhaps it shouldn't shock us that that argument
doesn't succeed after all.</p>

<p>Finally, although I gave Plato, previously, the assumption that if
only we could establish the simplicity of the soul, it would follow
that soul was indestructible--after all, you couldn't break a soul by
tearing its pieces apart if it didn't have pieces, if it didn't have
parts--nonetheless, I just want to register the thought that it's not
actually obvious that simples can't be destroyed. Well, they clearly
can't be destroyed by the particular method of destruction that
involves taking them apart. If they don't have parts, you can't take
them apart. But for all that, it still seems conceptually possible for
a simple to be destroyed in the following sense: it goes out of
existence. After all, where did the simples come from in the first
place? Well, at least from a logical point of view, it seems as though
there's no difficulty in imagining that at one point a given simple
didn't exist and then at the next point it popped into existence. Well,
how did that happen? Maybe God said--God says at the beginning of
Genesis, "Let there be light." So maybe He says, "Let there be
simples." At a given moment they weren't there; the next moment they
were. Well, after a while maybe God says, "Let the simples no longer
exist." Given moment there they were; the next moment, they no longer
exist.</p>

<p>Seems as though that idea makes sense, and so even if we agreed that
the soul was simple, even if we granted everything in Plato's argument
up to this point and said, "the soul really is simple," it still
wouldn't follow that it's immortal. We'd still have to worry about the
possibility that the simple soul might simply pop out of existence at a
given point, perhaps the very point when the body gets destroyed. So
I'm inclined to think that this most recent argument of Plato's--the
argument from simplicity--no, that's not successful either.</p>

<p>Before leaving that argument, there's one other <i>piece</i> of
business I want to discuss. This is a footnote that I put aside, a
point that I put aside previously. You'll recall that we were worried
about--The objection got raised the right way to think about the soul
is like the harmony of a harp. And this was originally offered as a
counterexample to the thought that invisible things couldn't be
destroyed. But harmony could be destroyed. It was invisible, so
invisible things could be destroyed. But I noticed, I mentioned that,
look, whether or not this is a problem for the argument, it's an
interesting suggestion in its own right. Because the suggestion that
the mind is to the body, the soul is to the body, like harmony is to an
instrument with strings, seems to me to be an early attempt to describe
something like the physicalist conception of the mind. Just as harmony
is something that gets produced by a well-tuned instrument, the soul or
the mind is something that gets produced by a well-tuned body. Now
Plato's got some objections to the suggestion that we should think of
the mind as the harmony of the body. And so I want to take just a
moment and talk about those objections because, of course, if they were
compelling objections that might well give us reason to doubt the
physicalist view. Whether or not Plato's arguments for the immortality
of the soul work, he might still have some good arguments against the
physicalist conception.</p>

<p>But in thinking about these objections, it's important to bear in
mind that it's only meant--the harmony analogy is only meant--as just
that, as an analogy. Right? The claim isn't, or at least it shouldn't
be, understood as saying literally, "the mind is harmony." It's rather,
the mind is <i>like</i> harmony; it's the sort of thing to the body
like harmony is to a harp, something that can be produced by a
well-functioning, well-tuned physical object. A well-tuned instrument
can produce melody and harmony. A well-tuned, properly functioning body
can produce mental activity. That's the suggestion. And so even if it
turns out that there are some ways in which the mind isn't exactly like
harmony, it doesn't show us that the physicalist view is wrong.</p>

<p>Well, so let's quickly look at what Plato's arguments were.
First--this is, I think, an interesting argument--Plato says, harmony
clearly cannot exist before the existence of the harp itself. Right?
The melodiousness of the harp can't exist prior to the physical
construction of the harp. And if mind were the sort of thing that was
produced by the proper functioning of the physical body, then pretty
obviously the mind could not exist prior to the creation of the
physical body. However, Plato has already argued earlier in the
dialogue that the soul does exist prior to the existence of the body.
That's the argument from recollection. If the soul exists prior to the
body, it can't be like harmony; physicalism has clearly got to be
false.</p>

<p>But I said that I didn't find the argument--I tried to explain why I
didn't find the argument from recollection persuasive. I certainly do
want to agree that if we became convinced that the soul did exist prior
to the existence of the body, we would certainly want to agree that the
soul is not like harmony. But I don't think the argument from
recollection succeeds.</p>

<p>Plato's second objection is to point out that harmony can vary. We
talk about the melodiousness of the harp. Well, it could be harmonious
in a variety of different ways and, indeed, to different degrees.
Something--an instrument--could be more or less harmonious. What it's
playing can be in greater or lesser harmony. But it doesn't seem as
though souls come in degrees. You've got a soul or you don't have a
soul. That's the argument, that's the objection. You've got a mind or
you don't have a mind. But perhaps we should--That's the objection, and
of course if that was right then again we might have to conclude, well,
whatever the mind is, it's not quite like harmony is to the body.</p>

<p>But I'm not so sure we should agree that the mind can't come in
degrees. It can at least--The mental aspects can come in degrees. We
can have varying degrees of intelligence, varying degrees of
creativity, varying degrees of reasonableness, varying degrees of
ability to communicate. So just as, we might say, just as the
functioning of the harp can come in varying degrees--more or less
harmony--the functioning of the body in terms of its mind can come in
varying degrees. So that second objection doesn't seem to me very
compelling.</p>

<p>Third objection, Plato points out--Socrates points out--that the
soul can be good or it could be evil, wicked. When the soul is good,
when you've got somebody who has got their stuff together, we might
speak of them as having a harmonious soul. If the soul were to the body
like harmony is to the instrument and the soul can be harmonious, it
would seem as though we'd have to be able to talk about harmony being
harmonious. So just as we can talk about the harmony of the soul, we'd
have to be able to--if the soul is like the harmony of the body--we'd
have to be able to talk about the harmony of the harmony. But we don't
talk about harmony of the harmony.</p>

<p>I'm not quite sure what to make of this objection. This might be a
point where it would be well to remind ourselves of the fact that the
suggestion was never that the soul just literally is harmony. It's just
similar to harmony, says the physicalist, in the way that harmony gets
produced by the body--by the instrument. In that same way, mind or
mental activity gets produced by the body. We don't have to say that
everything that's true of the mind is true of harmony and everything
that's true of harmony is true of the body--or the mind.</p>

<p>Still, I think there's a bit more we can say in response to this
objection, and that's this: Just as it's true that we can talk about
minds or souls being good or wicked, we can talk about different kinds
of harmony. There are--Certain harmonies are sweeter than others; some
of them are more jarring and atonal or discordant. Although we might
not normally talk about how harmonious the harmony is, it seems as
though harmonies can come in different sorts and different kinds. And
then, it turns out we really would have an analogy to the mind, which
can come in different sorts and different kinds. So I think this third
objection isn't really compelling either.</p>

<p>Finally, Plato raises one more objection. He says, "Look, the soul
is capable of directing the body, bossing it around, and indeed capable
of opposing the body." You know, your body might want that piece of
chocolate cake, but your soul says, "No, no. You're on a diet. Don't
eat it." Right? Your soul can oppose the body. But if the soul was just
harmony of the body, how could it do that? After all, the
harmoniousness of the harp can't affect what the harp does. All the
causal interaction is one way, as we might put it. In the case of the
harp and the musicality and the melodiousness and the harmony, the
physical state of the harp causes the melodiousness to be the way it
is. But the harmoniousness of the harp, doesn't ever change or alter or
direct the way the physical object the harp is.</p>

<p>In contrast, not only can the body affect the soul, the soul can
affect the body. So that suggests it can't really be like harmony and
the harp after all. I think that's a pretty interesting objection.
Since we do think, at least in the kind of position that we've been
taking for this class, that the soul can affect the body, we might ask,
how could it be that it's--that the physicalist view is right? If talk
about the mind is just a way of talking about what the body can do, how
can the abilities of the body affect the body itself?</p>

<p>I think the answer to this objection is probably going to be
something like, what's really going on when we talk about the soul
affecting the body is that--when we say certain functions of the body
are affecting the body--that certain mental functions are affecting the
body--how does this happen causally? Well, something like the physical
parts of the body that underwrite, that lie beneath the proper
functioning, the proper mental functioning of body, those are able to
alter the other parts of the body.</p>

<p>So look, right now I'm telling by body, "Wiggle my fingers." My soul
is giving instructions to my body. How does that happen? That's my mind
giving instructions to my body. How does that happen on the physicalist
view? Well, my mind giving instructions to my body, "wiggle my
fingers," is just one part of my body, my brain, giving instructions to
another part of my body, the muscles in my fingers. So, although we
talk about the mind altering the body, strictly what's going on there,
says the physicalist, is just one part of the body affecting another
part of the body. Can we have something like that with a harp? Well,
maybe not. Right? Maybe the harp's too simple a machine to have one
part of it affect another part of it in that way. Even if that were
true, that wouldn't give us reason to reject the physicalist
conception. It would just give us reason to think the harp's not
<i>very</i> much like the mind and the body. It's just the beginnings
of a picture, of a physicalist picture.</p>

<p>Still, even if we think about the harp and musicality, I think we
can see something analogous. Suppose I pluck a string on my harp,
producing a certain note. As we know, the vibrations of one string can
set into play the other strings vibrating as well. And so, suddenly,
what's happening in one part of the harp affects what's going on in
other parts of the harp. The musicality of my playing a certain chord
on the harp may create certain kinds of overtones in the harp, setting
the harp vibrating in various <i>other</i> ways. Well, that would be
analogous--perhaps not a precise analogy, but at least a rough analogy
to what goes on when my mind affects my body--to--if one part of my
body affects other parts of my body.</p>

<p>So, on the one hand, I want to give Plato a fair bit of credit for
taking the physicalist view seriously enough to try to criticize it.
And since when he was writing there weren't the kind of complicated
thinking machines that we've got nowadays, it's no criticism of Plato
that he used simple machines like musical instruments to try to think
about what a physicalist picture would look like. I want to give him
credit, but I also want to suggest that the objections that he raises
to the physicalist view just don't succeed. All right.</p>

<p>Now, there's one other argument that I want to consider in our
dialogue. And after the appeal to the simplicity of the soul, there's a
very long complicated discussion about what constitutes an adequate
explanation, and Socrates gives some of his history there and talks
about what he's looking for in trying to find adequate explanations of
things. And these passages are very, very difficult and happily for our
purposes we don't really need to go there.</p>

<p>Before the dialogue ends though, there's one further argument, which
I'll dub, "the argument from essential properties." Now again, it's
important to bear in mind as we try to make sense of this passage that
Plato is writing at a time when we don't have, we didn't have, all the
conceptual apparatus that we have nowadays. We stand on his shoulders;
we've inherited some of the distinctions that he was the first to try
to put into play. And so although, again, he's about to--I'm about to
sketch or reconstruct an argument and claim that that the argument
doesn't actually work, this isn't really meant by way of being
dismissive of Plato. I want to give him a tremendous amount of credit.
He's trying to see his way through a morass of issues that are still
confusing to us today, though I think we can see somewhat further than
he was able to see.</p>

<p>At any rate, the distinction we need to understand the final
argument, is the distinction between an essential property and a
contingent property. An essential property is a property that a given
object must have; it always has as long as it exists at all. A
contingent property is a property that an object may have, may happen
to have its entire existence, but could've existed without. So my car
is blue. That's a contingent property of my car. I could take it to the
paint shop and get it painted red, in which case it would be red. It
would no longer be blue, but the car would still exist. My car is blue,
but it could be red; it could exist as a red car. And even if I never,
over the entire course of existence of my car, never get it painted, so
that from the moment it came into creation to the moment it gets
smashed it's always blue--still, we understand perfectly well the idea
that it could've been red. There's nothing incompatible with the idea
that this car exists and is red. So that's an example of a contingent
property.</p>

<p>And I might have a pencil, and the pencil is whole. And I never
break it, but I could've broken it. That's a contingent property,
whether the pencil is whole or broken. I take a piece of metal; it's a
contingent property whether it's straight or bent. I bend it; now it's
bent. I might straighten it back out; now it's straight. Many, many
properties are contingent properties. You're happy, you're sad, you're
awake, you're asleep.</p>

<p>But some properties, in contrast, are essential properties. For the
particular thing that we're thinking about, it's not possible to have
that thing and not have the property in question. Plato gives the
example of fire and being hot. Fire is hot. That's a property that it's
got, but it's not a contingent property; it's an essential property.
It's not as though some fire is hot and some fire is cold or, "Oh yes,
it just happens that over the entire life of the fire the fire is hot,
but we could have made it cold." There's no such thing; there could be
no such thing as cold fire. As long as you've got a bit of fire, it's
hot. Take away the heat, you take away the fire, you destroy the fire.
You can't have cold fire. That's an example of an essential
property.</p>

<p>That is to say, Plato sees, as indeed I take it we all see at least
roughly, that there's some sort of distinction there, and he's trying
to see his way clear on these matters. That remains a controversial
question today--until today. Are there really essential properties in
the way we take there to be? If so, which properties are essential?
Which ones are contingent? Water is composed of H<sub>2</sub>O--that's
its atomic structure. Is that an essential property of water? Could you
have something that was water without being composed of
H<sub>2</sub>O--hydrogen and oxygen in that way? Well, some people say
yes, some people say no--but most of us we want to say, "Oh, there's an
example of an essential property. To be water, you must have that
atomic structure." All right. That's the thought.</p>

<p>Now, armed with this distinction, Plato says, "Here's an essential
property for the soul. Wherever there's a soul, it's alive." Now, by
"alive," I take it Plato means it's thinking, or it's capable of
thought. Wherever you've got a soul, you've got something capable of
thought. I suppose one could try to resist this claim of Plato's, but I
find it reasonably plausible. I start thinking about minds, and I ask
myself, "Could there be a mind that was incapable of thought?" Maybe
not. Maybe that's just built into minds by definition. Just like you
couldn't have something that was fire without it being hot, you
couldn't have something that was a mind without it being capable of
thought. It's important to say the word capable here. Right? It's not
as though all minds always are thinking. I presume there are stretches
during the night when my mind is not thinking, not dreaming. Still,
it's capable of thought even thought it's not thinking at the time. But
you say, "No. Here's a mind that's not even capable of thought." I want
to say, "Then, it's just not a mind."</p>

<p>So all right, maybe being capable of thought is an essential
property of the mind. Plato thinks about the mind in terms of souls, so
maybe being capable of thought is an essential property of the soul.
And I think that's what Plato means when he suggests the mind is
essential--the soul is essentially alive. It's a necessary property, as
we might put it, of the soul, that it's alive, that it's capable of
thought. So I want to say, "Not an implausible claim." Let's give it to
Socrates.</p>

<p>But once we give it to Socrates, Plato thinks now he's pretty much
done. After all, think about what it means to say that something's got
an essential property. Fire's got the essential property of being hot.
It means there are only two possibilities. Either you've got some fire
and it will be hot, or the fire has been destroyed, it's been put out.
Those are the only two possibilities. You either have--If heat is an
essential property of fire, either you've got some fire and it's hot,
or the fire no longer exists, it's been put out. There's no third
possibility of a non-hot fire, of a cold fire. So, if you've got the
claim that life's an essential property of the soul, only two
possibilities: either you've got the soul and it's alive--to wit, it's
capable of thought--or the soul's been destroyed.</p>

<p>But Plato thinks we can rule out that other possibility. How? Well,
it's by thinking about this particular essential property. There's
nothing in the idea that fire has the essential property of being hot
to make us think it couldn't be destroyed, but there is something,
Plato thinks, in the idea of being essentially alive to rule out the
possibility of its being destroyed.</p>

<p>In fact, as you say the very words you begin to feel the force, the
pull of Plato's position. If the soul is essentially alive, if it's
necessarily alive, it's got to be alive. It can't be destroyed. That's,
I think, at least the kind of argument that Plato means to put forward.
He does it in terms of the phrase, "deathless." He says, I want to
actually get this up here on the board [See Figure 9.1]. One--life is
an essential property of the soul. But if you think about what that
means, it follows that the soul is deathless. After all, if the soul
is--If it's essentially alive, that means it can't be dead. So it's
deathless. But after all, anything that's deathless can't die. So the
soul cannot die, which is just to say it's indestructible. So, soul
can't be destroyed. Something like this seems to be Plato's argument.
One, life's an essential property of the soul, but we can just
summarize that by saying the soul is deathless. But if the soul is
deathless, it can't die. If it can't die, it can't be destroyed, it's
indestructible. So the soul can't be destroyed. Remember, once we said
the soul was alive, there were only two possibilities. If the soul was
essentially alive, either we have the soul, it's alive, capable of
thought, or it's destroyed. But if the soul can't be destroyed, that
leaves only the possibility the soul is alive, capable of thought.
That's just what Plato thinks; the soul will always exist, capable of
thought.</p>

<p>Well, it won't shock you to hear that I don't think this argument
actually works. And I think where it goes wrong is there's a certain
kind of ambiguity in the idea of being deathless. What does it mean to
say that something is deathless? I think there are two possible
interpretations of that phrase [See Figure 9.2]. If something is
deathless, then it can't be that--well, what? One possibility is, it
can't be that the soul exists and is dead. That's one possible
interpretation. To say that something is deathless means you'll never
have a soul that exists and the same time that it exists it's dead. But
there's a second possible interpretation of deathless. It can't be that
the soul was destroyed. It's very easy to confuse these two
interpretations of deathless, A and B. And basically, this is what I
think is going on with Plato. He's running back and forth between these
two interpretations. If life is an essential property of the soul, then
that means we will never have, as it were, a soul in our hand that
exists and is dead. Just in the same way that you'll never have a piece
of fire in your hand, as it were, that exists and is cold. It can't
happen. Wherever you've got a soul, it is alive. So it's deathless in
sense number, in sense A.</p>

<p>Since wherever you've got a soul it must be alive, it couldn't be
the case that the soul exists and is dead. So it's deathless in sense
A. But for all that, it could still be, logically speaking, that the
soul could be destroyed, just like a fire can be put out. We could
imagine something that couldn't be destroyed. Then of course it would
be deathless in sense B, a much stronger sense of deathless. What Plato
needs, what Plato wants, is to convince us that the soul is deathless
in sense B: It's true of the soul that it can't be that it was
destroyed. But all he's entitled to is sense A: You'll never have a
soul that exists and is dead, because being alive is an essential
property of the soul. But the mere fact that where there's a soul it's
alive, doesn't mean the soul couldn't be destroyed. Just like from the
fact that where there's fire it's hot doesn't mean the fire can't be
destroyed.</p>

<p>It's, I think, pretty easy to get confused in thinking about these
issues. It's difficult to see your way clearly to these two different
notions of deathless. It's difficult to get to the point where you can
clearly use the language of essential properties without getting
screwed up. Still, I think that's what happened here. We grant Plato
the thought that the soul has an essential property of being alive;
from this, it follows that where there's a soul it is alive, and hence,
it's deathless in sense A. But once we start thinking about the
category, the notion of being deathless, we're tempted to re-understand
that as being deathless in sense B, can't be destroyed. And that, I
think, doesn't follow.</p>

<p>All right. Where does that leave us? Plato's gone through a series
of arguments for the immortality, the indestructibility of the soul,
and I've argued that none of them work. Some of them are worth taking
seriously. That's why we've spent the last week or so going over them.
But none of them, as far as I can see, are successful. And I hardly
need remind you that this comes on the heels of a previous week or two
in which we talked about various other arguments for the very existence
of an immaterial soul. And I've argued that none of those arguments
work either. As far as I can see then, the arguments that might be
offered for the existence of an immaterial soul, let alone an immortal
soul, the arguments don't succeed. It's not that the idea of a soul is
in any way silly; it's not that it's not worth thinking about. It's
that when we ask ourselves, "Do we have any good reason to believe in
an immaterial soul?" and actually try to spell out what those reasons
might be, as we look more carefully we see the arguments are not very
compelling.</p>

<p>So I'm prepared to conclude there is no soul. There's no good reason
to believe in souls. And I so I conclude--at least there's no good
enough reason to believe in souls--and so I conclude there are
none.</p>

<p>And this is the position that here on out I'm going to be assuming
for the rest of the class. I'm going to have us continue to think about
death, but now think about death from the physicalist perspective.
Given the assumption that the body is all there is, that talk about the
mind is just a way of talking about the abilities of the body to do
certain special mental activities. There are no extra things beyond the
body, no immaterial souls.</p>

<p>Now, it wouldn't be unreasonable at this point to accuse me of
begging the question. After all, think about what I've done. I've put
all of the burden of proof on the fan of souls. I've asked the dualist,
"Give me some reason to believe your position." And I've said the
arguments on behalf of dualism aren't very convincing. Don't I now
need, in fairness, to do the same thing for the physicalist? Don't I
need to turn to the physicalist and say, "Give me some reason to
believe that physicalism is true? Give me some reason to believe souls
don't exist." After all, I turned to the dualist and said, "Give me
some reason to believe in souls." Those arguments didn't work. Don't I
now need to turn to the physicalist and say, "Give me some reason
<i>not</i> to believe in souls? Prove that souls <i>don't</i> exist."
Isn't that fair?</p>

<p>So let's pause and ask ourselves, how do you go about proving that
something doesn't exist? Or, to put it in a slightly better way, when
do you need to prove that something doesn't exist? When we have
examples of things whose existence we don't believe in, how do we
decide when we're justified in disbelieving them? Take something like
dragons. Let me assume that everybody in this class, in this room, does
not believe in the existence of dragons. How do I prove that there
aren't any dragons? I mean, there could be dragons. Couldn't there? But
there aren't any. We don't believe in dragons. So don't you need to
disprove the existence of dragons before you continue on your way of
not believing in them? I imagine nobody in this room believes in the
existence of Zeus, the Greek god. How do you disprove the existence of
Zeus? Don't we have an obligation to prove that Zeus doesn't exist? But
how could you do that?</p>

<p>Well, unsurprisingly, I don't actually think you do have an
obligation to disprove those things. That doesn't mean you don't have
any obligations. You just have to be very careful about what the
intellectual obligations come to. So back to dragons. What do we need
to do for dragons? Well, the most important thing you need to do, to
justify your skepticism about dragons, is to refute all of the
arguments that might be offered on behalf of dragons.</p>

<p>My son's got a book about dragons with some very nice photographs.
So, one of the things I need to do in order to justify my skepticism
about dragons is explain away the photographs, or the drawings, or what
have you. I need to explain why it is that we have pictures, even
though there really aren't any dragons. Well, some of these are just
drawings, and people were drawing things out of their imagination. The
things that look like photographs, nowadays with computer generated
graphics, you can make things that look like photographs, and given
Photoshop you can make things that look like pictures of just about
anything that doesn't even exist.</p>

<p>How do I prove there aren't any unicorns? Well, I look at the
various reported sightings of unicorns and I try to explain them away,
"Well, you know, it's the first time people, Europeans, saw the
rhinoceros. It sort of reminded them of a horse with a big horn. And
maybe that's where the reports of rhinoceros came--or the various
reports of the unicorn came from. The various unicorn horns that have
been offered in various collections, upon examination by biologists
turn out to be narwhal horns, horns from whales, and so forth and so
on." You look at each bit of evidence that gets offered on behalf of
the unicorn and you debunk it. You explain why it's not compelling. And
when you're done, you're entitled to say, "You know, as far as I can
tell, there aren't any unicorns. As far as I can tell, there aren't any
dragons." It's not as though you've got some obligation to look in
every single cave anywhere on the surface of the Earth and say, "Oh, no
dragons in there, no dragons in there, no dragons in there, no dragons
in there, no dragons in there." You are pretty much justified in being
skeptical about the existence of dragons once you've undermined the
arguments for dragons.</p>

<p>Now, there might be something more that you could do. In at least
some cases, you can go on to argue the very idea of the kind of thing
we're talking about is impossible. It's not just--Take dragons again;
it's not just that there's no good reason to believe in dragons. The
very idea of a dragon may be scientifically incoherent, at least given
the science as we understand it. I mean, dragons are supposed to breath
fire. So that must mean they've got fire in their belly. But how does
the fire continue to exist in their belly, absent--lack of oxygen? Why
isn't the fire in their belly busy burning and destroying the membranes
of their stomach or whatever? All right, you could, I suppose, try to
prove that dragons were scientifically impossible. And if you could,
then you'd have an extra reason to not believe in them. But it's not as
though you have to prove that something's impossible to be justified in
not believing in it. I don't think unicorns are impossible. I just
don't think there are any. Surely, there could be horses with a single
long horn growing out of their forehead. There just aren't any.</p>

<p>So armed with these ideas, come back to the discussion of souls. Do
I, as a physicalist who does not believe in the existence of souls,
immaterial entities above and beyond the body, do I need to disprove
the existence of souls? "Well, there's no soul here, no souls there."
No. What I need to do is to take a look at each argument that gets
offered for the existence of a soul and rebut it--explain why those
arguments are not compelling. I don't need to prove that souls are
impossible. I just need to undermine the case for souls. If there's no
good reason to believe in souls, that actually constitutes a reason to
believe there <i>are</i> no souls.</p>

<p>Now, if you want to, you could go on and try to prove that souls are
impossible in the same way that maybe dragons are impossible. But I'm
not sure that I myself find such impossibility claims especially
persuasive. I don't believe in the existence of souls, but that doesn't
mean that I find the idea of an immaterial entity like the soul
impossible. Now, some people might say, "Well, you know, it violates
science as we know it. It violates physics to have there be something
immaterial." But science is constantly coming around to believe in
entities or properties that it didn't believe in previously. Maybe it
just hasn't gotten around to believing in souls yet. Or if current
science rules out the possibility of souls, maybe we should say, "So
much the worse for current science."</p>

<p>So I'm not somebody who wants to say we can disprove the existence
of souls. I don't think we can disprove them. I don't think the idea of
a soul is in any way incoherent. There are philosophers who've thought
that. I'm not one of them. But I don't think I need to disprove the
existence of a soul to be justified in not believing in it. Unicorns
aren't impossible, but for all that, I'm justified in thinking there
aren't any. Why? Because all the evidence for unicorns just doesn't add
up to very convincing case. Souls are not impossible, but for all that,
I think I'm justified in believing there aren't any. Why? Because when
you look for the--look at the arguments that have been offered to try
to convince us of the existence of souls, those arguments just aren't
very compelling, or so it seems to me. So, from this point on out, I'll
be assuming the physicalist view is correct, and will be thinking about
the issues of death as they'd be understood from the physicalist point
of view.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
