
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 8 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">February 8, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> We've been looking at Plato's
arguments for the immortality of the soul, and so far I have to say I
haven't found them very compelling arguments. In a minute, I'm going to
turn to an argument that at least strikes me as more interesting. It's
more difficult to pin down where it goes wrong. But before we do, I
want to make a last couple of comments about the argument we were
considering at the end of last class.</p>

<p>That was the argument from recollection. You recall the basic idea
was that although objects in the ordinary familiar empirical world are
not perfectly just, perfectly round, what have you, they're able to
remind us of perfect justice, perfect roundness and the like. And when
Plato asked himself, "How could that be?" the answer he gives is,
"Well, it's got to be that we were previously acquainted with the forms
before our life in this world." And that shows that the soul must be
something that existed prior to the creation of the body. That's the
argument from recollection. And at the very end of class I suggested
that, look, even if we were to grant to Plato that in order to think
about justice, circularity, what have you, we had to somehow grasp the
forms, and even if we were to grant to Plato that nothing in this world
is perfectly round or perfectly just, it's not necessarily correct to
say, "So the only possible explanation of what's going on is that these
things in the empirical world remind us of our prior acquaintance with
the forms."</p>

<p>It could be that what goes on is, when we bump up against something
that's partially just or partially beautiful or partially
round--imperfectly round--what happens is, those things sort of trigger
our minds in such a way that we begin to think about the forms for the
very first time. So it might be, in order to think about justice and
roundness, we have to grasp the forms. But it could be that we only
grasp the forms in this life, for the very first time. Exposure to the
things that participate in the forms may nudge our minds or our souls
in such a way that at that point--given that exposure--we begin to
grasp the forms. It's as though the ordinary earthly objects, we bump
into them or they bump into us, and they get us to look upwards to the
heavenly Platonic realm. I don't mean literally upwards. It's not as
though these things--the number three--is up there. But if you accept
the metaphor, running into things in the empirical world gets our minds
to start thinking about, for the first time, the heavenly realm of the
Platonic forms and ideas.</p>

<p>That would be just as likely a possibility as the alternative
explanation that what's going on is that ordinary empirical objects are
reminding us of our prior acquaintance. Perhaps these ordinary objects
act like letters of introduction, getting us to, helping us to, think
about the forms for the very first time. Well, if that's right, then of
course, we don't have any good reason to follow Plato when he says, "It
must be the case that the soul existed prior to the--prior to
birth."</p>

<p>Now, the objection I've just raised is not an objection that Plato
raises in the <i>Phaedo</i>, but he does raise a different objection.
Remember our concern isn't, strictly speaking, with the question, "Did
the soul exist before our birth? Did the soul exist before our bodies?"
but rather, "Is the soul immortal?" And so, having now given the
argument from recollection, Plato envisions two of Socrates' disciples,
Simmias and Cebes, responding, objecting, by saying, "Look, even if the
soul existed before birth, it doesn't follow that it exists after
death. And that's, after all, what we really want, are wondering about.
We want to know, will we survive our deaths? Is the soul immortal? And
you haven't yet shown that Socrates," they object. Could be that it
existed before, but won't exist afterwards.</p>

<p>But very nicely--it's quite elegant structure at this
point--Socrates puts together the two arguments that we've just been
rehearsing--the argument from recollection and the argument that came
before that, the one that I dubbed "the argument from recycling."
Remember, the argument from recycling says, when you build something,
you build it out of parts, and when that thing falls apart you go back
to the parts. All right. So the prior parts get recycled. The soul, we
now say--based on the argument from recollection--the soul is one of
our prior parts. The soul existed before we were put together, or
before we were put together with our bodies. If you then combine the
argument from recycling and say, the parts that existed before are
going to exist afterwards, it must follow that if the soul existed
before, it will exist afterwards as well. And so we've got the
immortality of the soul after all.</p>

<p>Now, bracket the fact that, as I just explained, I don't myself find
the argument from recollection persuasive. I don't think we've got any
good reason to believe--based on the sort of things that Plato is
drawing our attention to--I don't think we've got any good reason to
believe that the soul existed before we were born. But even if we grant
him that, we shouldn't be so quick to conclude, on the basis of
combining the argument from recollection and the argument from
recycling, that the soul will continue to exist after the death of our
bodies. After all, take a more familiar, humdrum example. Cars are
built out of non-cars, right? Cars get built out of engines and tires
and steering wheels. And the engine is not a car; the steering wheel is
not a car. So you build the car out of its parts. Now, the engine is a
prior-existing part. So can we conclude then that from the fact
that--argument from recycling: parts get reused, get rebuilt, when cars
get destroyed, the parts are still around--can we conclude from the
argument from recycling and the fact that the engine is a
prior-existing part from which the car was built, that the engine will
continue to exist forever after the destruction of the car? No,
obviously you can't conclude that at all. Sometimes when cars get
destroyed the engine gets destroyed right along with it. And of course,
even if--in many cases--the engine continues to exist for a while after
the destruction of the car, it certainly doesn't follow that the engine
is immortal, that it continues to exist forever. Engines will
eventually decompose and turn back into atoms. So from the mere fact
that the engine was a part that existed before the car existed, and the
further fact that when the car breaks down, it decomposes back into
parts, it certainly doesn't follow that all of the parts that existed
prior to the existence of the car will be around forever. That would
just be false.</p>

<p>So even if we were to give Socrates the assumption that--the thesis
that--the soul existed before we were put together, before we were
born, it still wouldn't follow that the soul will continue to exist
after we're taken back apart. The soul might eventually decay just like
the engine will eventually decay. What we need, to really become
convinced of the immortality of the soul, is not the mere suggestion,
even it was--even if we were convinced--is not the mere suggestion that
the soul was around before our birth. We need to believe that the soul,
unlike an engine, can't itself be destroyed, can't itself decompose,
can't fall apart. That's what we need if we're really going to become
convinced of the immortality of the soul.</p>

<p>Now, as I remarked previously, one of the amazing things--not
amazing but one of the really attractive things about Plato's dialogues
is, you raise an objection and it often seems as though Plato himself,
whether or not he explicitly states the objection, seems aware of the
objection, because he'll go on to say something that is responsive to
it. And again, that makes sense if you think of these dialogues as a
kind of pedagogical tool to help you get better at philosophizing. So
the very next argument that Plato turns to can be viewed, I think, as
responding to this unstated objection--well, I stated it, but Plato
doesn't state it in the dialogue--the worry that even if the soul was
one of the parts, even if the soul was already around before we were
born, how do we know it can't come apart? How do we know the soul can't
be destroyed? Since what we want to know is whether the soul is
immortal, how do we know it can't break?</p>

<p>Plato's next argument then tries to deal directly with this worry,
and it's a quite interesting argument. I'll give it another--a new
label--I'll call it the "argument from simplicity." Socrates turns to a
discussion of what kinds of things can break and what kinds of things
can't break; what kinds of things can be destroyed, and what kinds of
things can't be destroyed. He thinks about examples; he surveys
examples and tries to extract a kind of metaphysical principle from
this. And then, as we'll see, he's going to use this principle to
convince us--or to try to convince us--that the soul is immortal, it's
indestructible.</p>

<p>Well, lots of things can be destroyed. Here's a piece of paper. It
can be destroyed [sound of ripping paper] Right? Why was it that this
was the sort of thing that could be destroyed? Well, the
straightforward answer is the piece of paper had parts. And in breaking
it, in ripping it, what I literally did was I ripped one part from
another. To destroy the piece of paper, I take its parts apart. Here's
piece of chalk. The piece of chalk can be broken. What am I doing?
Taking its parts apart. The kinds of things that can be destroyed have
parts. They are composite. They are composed of their parts. Bodies can
be destroyed because you can take a sword to it and go sweep, sweep,
sweep and chop it into pieces. Composite things can be destroyed.
Things that have parts can be destroyed.</p>

<p>Now, what kind of things can't be destroyed? Well, it won't surprise
you that when Plato looks for an example of something that's eternal
and indestructible, his mind immediately starts thinking about the
Platonic forms. Take the number three. The number three can't be
destroyed, right? Even if nuclear explosion took place and everything
on Earth got atomized and destroyed through some bizarre science
fiction chain reaction, like they're always doing in movies, the number
three wouldn't be touched. The number three wouldn't be fazed. It would
still be true that three plus one equals four. You can't hurt the
number three. You can't alter or destroy perfect circularity. Why not?
Well, it doesn't have any parts. That's the thought. Things like the
Platonic forms are eternal, and they're eternal, changeless, and
indestructible, because they are simple--simple here being the
metaphysical notion that they're not composed of anything. Anything
that's built up out of parts you could, at least in principle, worry
about the parts coming apart and, hence, the thing being destroyed. But
anything that's simple can't be destroyed in that way. It has no parts
to take apart.</p>

<p>So the kinds of things that can be destroyed are the things with
parts, and those are the sorts of things that change, right? Even if
they're not destroyed, what's a tip off to something being composite?
The fact that it changes. Suppose I take a bar of metal and I bend it.
I haven't destroyed it, but I've changed it. I'm able to change it by
rearranging the relationships between the various parts. My body is
constantly changing because the relationships between my arms and my
head and so forth, my muscles are moving. You rearrange the parts, the
thing changes. Oh, but that means it's got parts and could be
destroyed. So we've got some nice generalizations. Things that change
have parts; things with parts can be destroyed. What are the kinds of
things that you can change and destroy? Those are the familiar
empirical objects that we can see: pieces of paper, bodies, pieces of
chalk, bars of metal.</p>

<p>In contrast, on the whole other side, you've got things that are
invisible, like the number three--nobody sees the number three--things
that are invisible, that never change. The number three never changes,
right? The number three is an odd number. It's not as though, oh, today
it's odd but maybe tomorrow it'll be even. It's eternally an odd
number. Three plus one equals four today, yesterday and forever. These
facts about the number three will never change. The number three is
changeless. So the forms are eternal; they're invisible; they are
changeless. They're simple, and simple things can't be destroyed; forms
can't be destroyed.</p>

<p>You put all this together; these are the sorts of thoughts that
Socrates assembles, and I've got the initial thoughts up there on the
board. [See Figure 8.1] All right.</p>

<p>So premise number one, only composite things can be destroyed.
Premise number two, only changing things are composite. So if you put
one and two together, you'd get: only changing things could be
destroyed. And now add three, invisible things don't change. Well, if
you've got to be the kind of thing that can change in order to be
composite and you've got to be composite in order to be destroyed,
invisible things don't change, follows four, invisible things can't be
destroyed. That's the metaphysical thesis that Socrates comes to by
thinking about cases. And that's the crucial premise or sub-conclusion
for the immortality of the soul, because then Socrates invites us to
think about the soul. Is the soul visible or invisible? He says, pretty
obviously, "it's invisible." But if invisible things can't be
destroyed, the soul can't be destroyed. So one, two and three got us
four, invisible things can't be destroyed, but five, the soul is
invisible so six, the soul can't be destroyed. That's my best attempt
at reconstructing the argument from simplicity. It's not as though
Plato himself spells it out with premises and conclusions like that,
but I think this is fairly faithful to the kind of argument he means to
put forward.</p>

<p>And in a moment I'll turn to evaluating whether that's a good
argument or not. But I think it's a pretty interesting argument; it's
an argument worth taking fairly seriously. Except, I've got to confess
to you that Socrates doesn't quite conclude the way I would've thought
he would've concluded. So I've had the argument conclude six, the soul
can't be destroyed. But what Socrates actually says is--his actual
conclusion is--"And so the soul is indestructible or nearly so." That's
rather an odd qualification, "or nearly so." The conclusion that
Socrates reaches from his examination of change and invisibility and so
forth and so on, and compositeness versus simplicity, is that "the soul
is indestructible or nearly so."</p>

<p>Now, adding that qualification opens the door to a worry. The worry
gets raised by Cebes who says, even if we grant that the soul is nearly
indestructible, that's not good enough to get us immortality. And he
gives a very nice analogy of somebody who's--a coat, which could
outlast the owner but isn't immortal. Or the owner could go through
several coats; but still at some point the owner's going to die as
well. The owner is far more immortal, in that sense, closer to
immortality. And I've gone through many coats in my life, but for all
that, I'm not indestructible. If all we've got is the mere fact that
the soul is "nearly" indestructible, it takes a whole lot more work to
destroy it, maybe it lasts a whole lot longer; maybe it goes through a
whole lot of bodies being reincarnated a half-dozen, or a dozen, or
hundred times before it wears out and gets destroyed. That's not enough
to give us the immortality of the soul. That's the objection that Cebes
raises. And one of the oddities is that, as far as I can see, Socrates
never responds to that objection. Raises the objection--that is, Plato
raises the objection in the voice of Cebes--but Socrates, on Plato's
behalf, never answers the objection.</p>

<p>It's hard to say what exactly is going on. It might be that Plato's
worried that he hasn't really shown that the soul is immortal
afterwards. Maybe this argument from simplicity isn't really as good as
it needs to be. And maybe that explains why Plato then goes on to offer
yet another argument. After all, if this argument really did show the
immortality of the soul, why would he need to offer a further
argument?--The argument from essential properties, which we'll be
turning to later. So maybe Plato just thought there wasn't a good
answer to Cebes' objection. But I want to say, on Plato's behalf, or at
least on behalf of the argument, Socrates should never have concluded
the argument with this odd qualifying phrase that the soul is
"indestructible or nearly so." He should've just said the soul is
indestructible, full stop.</p>

<p>After all, if we have premises one, two, and three--only composite
things can be destroyed, only changing things are composite, invisible
things don't change--if you put those together, you get four, invisible
things can't be destroyed. You don't get the more modest conclusion,
"invisible things can't be destroyed or it's a whole lot harder to
destroy them." If we've got one, two and three, we're entitled to the
bold conclusion: "invisible things can't be destroyed, period." Full
stop. And then if five is true, if the soul really is invisible, we're
entitled to conclude six, the soul can't be destroyed--not, the soul
can't be destroyed, or if it can be destroyed it's very, very hard and
takes a very, very long time. We are, rather, entitled to the bolder
conclusion, the soul can't be destroyed, full stop, period, end of the
discussion.</p>

<p>So despite the fact that Socrates draws this weaker conclusion, it
seems to me that the argument he's offered us, if it works at all,
entitles us to draw the bolder conclusion. Not that the soul is
indestructible or nearly so, but that the soul is indestructible. Well,
maybe Plato realized that; maybe that's the reason why he doesn't
bother giving an answer to Cebes. Maybe it's an invitation to the
reader to recognize that there's a better argument here than even the
characters in the drama have noticed--don't know, don't know what Plato
had in mind.</p>

<p>But at any rate, our question shouldn't be, "What was Plato
thinking?" but, "Is the argument any good?" Do we now have an argument
for the immortality of the soul? After all, if the soul can't be
destroyed, it's immortal. Is it a good argument or not?</p>

<p>Simmias raises a different objection. Simmias says we can't conclude
that the soul is indestructible, or nearly so, or whatever, because we
should not believe the sub-conclusion four, invisible things can't be
destroyed. Simmias says invisible things <i>can</i> be destroyed. And
if that's true, then of course we no longer have an argument for the
indestructibility or near indestructibility of the soul. Because even
if the soul is invisible, five, if nonetheless, contrary to what
Socrates was claiming, invisible things can be destroyed, then maybe
the invisible soul can be destroyed as well.</p>

<p>Now, Simmias doesn't merely assert, boldly, invisible things can be
destroyed. He offers an example of an invisible thing that can be
destroyed--harmony. He starts talking about the harmony that gets
produced by a stringed instrument; let's say a harp. In fact, he says,
this is a very nice example for us to think about because some people
have suggested--Simmias says--some people have suggested that the mind
is like harmony. It's as though the mind is like harmony of the body.
So to spell out the analogy a bit more fully, and I'll say a bit more
about it later, harmony is to the harp as the mind is to the body. All
right. He says, there are people who put forward views like this, and
at any rate harmony can certainly be destroyed. You don't see harmony,
right? Harmony is invisible. But for all that, you can destroy harmony.
So there's the harp making its melodious, harmonious sounds, and then
you take an ax to the harp, bang, bang, bang, chop, chop, chop, or a
hammer or whatever; now the harmony's been destroyed. So even though
it's invisible, you can destroy it by destroying the musical instrument
on which it depends.</p>

<p>And of course, there's the worry, right? If the mind is like the
harmony of the body, then maybe you could destroy the mind, the soul,
by destroying the body on which the mind depends. So the crucial point
right now is that thinking about harmony is offered as a counterexample
to the generalization that invisible things can't be destroyed. Harmony
is invisible. Harmony can be destroyed. So invisible things can be
destroyed. So you're wrong, Socrates, when you say invisible things
can't be destroyed. So even if we grant that the soul is invisible as
well, maybe the soul also is an invisible thing that can be
destroyed.</p>

<p>That's a great objection. It's an objection worth taking very
seriously. And the oddity is, Socrates doesn't respond to it in the way
that he should have, in the way that he needed to. Socrates instead
spends some time worrying about the question, "Is the soul really like
harmony or not?" Is this metaphor--think about the relationship between
the mind and body as similar to the relationship between harmony and a
harp--Socrates spends some time criticizing that analogy.</p>

<p>Now, in a few minutes I'll turn to the question, what about
Socrates' criticisms of the analogy? Are they good criticisms or not?
But even if they are good criticisms, I want to say, that's not good
enough to help your argument Socrates. Even if we were to say, you know
what? The mind isn't very much like harmony at all. That analogy really
stinks. So what? All that Simmias needs to cause problems for Socrates'
argument is the claim that harmony is invisible and harmony can be
destroyed. As long as that is true, we can't continue to believe that
invisible things can't be destroyed.</p>

<p>So what Socrates needs to do is to say either harmony can't be
destroyed, but pretty obviously it can, the melodious sounds coming out
of an instrument can be destroyed. So he would need to argue then,
perhaps, that harmony is not really invisible. If he could show us, if
he could convince us, that harmony is not really invisible, then we
would no longer have a counterexample to the claim that the invisible
can't be destroyed, and the argument could still then proceed as it was
before.</p>

<p>So that's what Socrates should have done. He should have said, "You
know what? Harmony is not really invisible," or "It can't be
destroyed." But there's not a whiff of that, at least in the dialogue
as we've got it, not a whiff of that as far as I can see. Socrates
never says, "Simmias, here is where your objection goes wrong. Harmony
is not really invisible, can't really be destroyed, whatever it is. So
we don't really have a counterexample." Instead, he gets hung up on
this question, "Is it a good analogy? Is it a good way for thinking
about the mind or not?" But even if it isn't, that wouldn't save the
argument.</p>

<p>Now, I am going to take some time to think about whether or not
harmony is a good analogy, because I actually think it is a good
analogy. I think what's going on in the harmony--the suggestion that we
should think about the mind like harmony, as though it was the harmony
of the body--is an early attempt to state the physicalist view. Talk
about the mind, says the physicalist, is just a way of talking about
the body. Or, more carefully, it's a way of talking about certain
things the body can do when it's functioning properly, when it's well
tuned, as we might put it. Just like, talk about the harmony or the
melodious sounds or what have you of the harp, is a way--these things
are a way of talking about what things the harp can do. It can produce
melodious, harmonious sounds when it's functioning properly, when it's
well tuned. So the harmony analogy is, I think, an attempt, and not a
bad attempt, at gesturing towards the question, how do physicalists
think about the mind?</p>

<p>Now, when I tried to get you to grasp how physicalists think about
the mind, I used examples about computers and robots and the like.
Well, it's not remotely surprising that Plato doesn't use those kinds
of analogies. He doesn't have computers; he doesn't have robots. Still,
he has physical objects that can do things. And the ability to do
things depends on the proper functioning of the physical object. And
so, I think he can see that there's this alternative to his dualism. He
can see you could be a physicalist and say that the mind is dependent
on the body; the mind is just a way of talking about what the body can
do when it's working properly. It's dependent just the same way that,
well, for example, harmony is dependent upon the physical instrument.
So I think it's a very nice attempt to discuss the physicalist
alternative to Plato's dualism. And that's why it will be worth taking
some time to ask ourselves, well, what about Plato's objections then?
If he can convince us that the soul is not like harmony of the body,
maybe that will be some sort of problem for the physicalists. So I'll
come back to that in a few more minutes.</p>

<p>But first, let's worry about the point that I was emphasizing
earlier, namely, even if the soul's not very much like harmony, so
what? If harmony really is invisible and harmony really can be
destroyed, then invisible things can be destroyed. Even if the soul's
nothing like--that's not a good analogy for thinking about the
physicalist position or what have you--so what? If some invisible
things can be destroyed and harmony is an example of that, then, by
golly, it's going to follow that we can't conclude from the
invisibility of the soul that the soul cannot be destroyed. So even
though Socrates doesn't respond to that objection, we need to ask on
Socrates' behalf, is there a possible answer to this objection? And I
think there are at least the beginnings of one.</p>

<p>We have to ask: when we say, "invisible things can't be destroyed,"
what did we mean by "invisible?" And I want to distinguish three
different possible interpretations, three different claims. [See Figure
8.2] So invisible means, one, there's one possibility, can't be seen.
Two, different possibility, can't be observed. I've got in mind the
broader notion of all five senses. Three, different possible
interpretation of invisible, can't be detected.</p>

<p>What we have to ask ourselves is, when Socrates puts his argument
forward, which of these did he have in mind? First, let's be clear on
how these things are different. Some things can't be seen but can be
sensed some other way. So colors can be seen; smells cannot be seen,
but of course smells--the smell of coffee--can be sensed through the
five senses. Sounds can't be seen, they're not visible, but for all
that they can be sensed. You can hear them through your ears. So,
without getting hung up on what does the English word "invisible" mean,
let's just notice that there's a difference between saying "it can't be
seen through the eyes" and "can't be observed through one sense or the
other." And then three is a different notion altogether, a stronger
notion altogether. There might be things that can't even be detected
through any of the five senses. The number three--not only can't I see
it, I can't taste it, I can't hear it, I can't smell it, can't touch
it, right? The number three is invisible in this much bolder way. It
can't be detected at all by the five senses--can't be detected in terms
of its--it doesn't leave traces behind, right? I don't see dinosaurs,
but of course they leave traces behind in fossils. There's a way in
which you can talk about it being detected by its effects. All
right.</p>

<p>So again, don't get hung up on what does the English word invisible
mean. Let's just ask ourselves, what notion of invisibility--if we'll
use the word between these three ways--what notion did Socrates'
argument turn on? Well, the most natural way to start by interpreting
him is with number one. When he says, "Invisible things don't change,"
what he means is, things that you can't see don't change, and
so--continue to interpret invisible in number four the same
way--invisible things can't be destroyed. On the first interpretation
what he'd be saying is, "If you can't see it with your eyes, it can't
be destroyed." Now, the trouble is, harmony shows that that's not so.
Harmony is indeed invisible in sense number one. You cannot see it with
your eyes. But for all that, it can be destroyed. So if what Socrates
means by invisibility is the first notion, can't been seen with your
eyes, then the argument's not any good. Harmony is a pretty compelling
counterexample.</p>

<p>But maybe that's not what Socrates means by invisible. Maybe instead
of one, he means two. When he talks about the soul being invisible and
invisible things being indestructible, maybe he means things that can't
be observed through any of your five senses. Now, in point of fact, I
think that is what he meant. Let me just give a quick quote. In our
edition, this is page 29. Some of you may have noticed that there are
little standardized paginations in our edition as well. So it's in the
academy paginations, number 79; he's talking about the difference
between the visible and the invisible things, chairs versus the forms.
And he says, "These latter, chairs, trees, stones, you could touch and
see and perceive with the other senses. But those that always remain
the same, the forms, can only be grasped by the reasoning power of the
mind. They are not seen but are invisible." So I think it's pretty
clear that when Socrates starts talking about what's visible versus
invisible, he doesn't mean to limit himself to vision; he means to be
talking about all of the five senses. So when we say--when he
says--"Invisible things can't be destroyed," he means the things that
you can't see or touch or hear or feel--whatever it is--see, touch,
smell, taste. Those things can't be destroyed.</p>

<p>Now, notice that if that's the way we interpret his argument,
harmony no longer works as a counterexample. Harmony was invisible when
we meant definition number one, can't be seen. But it's not invisible
if we mean definition number two, can't be sensed, can't be observed.
Harmony can be sensed through the ears, in which case it's not a
counterexample. It's not a counterexample to four. Four says,
"Invisible things can't be destroyed." And what Socrates should have
said is, harmony is not invisible in the relevant sense of invisible,
since it can be sensed. But--and this would be the crucial
point--notice, Socrates should've continued, the soul <i>is</i>
invisible in that sense. You don't see the soul; you don't taste the
soul; you don't touch the soul; you don't hear the soul. So if we
understand the argument in terms of the second interpretation of
invisible, it looks as though the argument still goes through. Simmias'
counterexample fails. Harmony is not invisible in the relevant sense,
so it could still be true that invisible things can't be destroyed.
Since the soul is invisible in that sense, it would follow that the
soul can't be destroyed.</p>

<p>However, even if Simmias' objection, his particular counterexample,
harmony, fails, that doesn't mean that we should still accept the
argument because there might be a different counterexample. So here's
my proposal. Suppose we think not about harmony but radio waves. Radio
waves are not sensible. They are not observable. You don't see a radio
wave. You can't touch a radio wave; you can't smell a radio wave, and
interestingly enough, you can't hear radio waves. But of course, for
all that, they can be destroyed. So even if we grant that what Socrates
meant by invisible was "cannot be observed," we still have to say, with
Simmias, "You know, four is just not true. Some invisible things can be
destroyed." Radio waves can be destroyed even though they're invisible
in the relevant sense. Yeah? Question?</p>

<p><b>Student</b>: [inaudible]</p>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Okay. So the suggestion was, radio
waves are a bit like the forms.</p>

<p><b>Student</b>: [inaudible]</p>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> They're not forms, but they're
perfect in that way. Was that the thought?</p>

<p><b>Student</b>: [inaudible]</p>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Ah! Okay, I misunderstood. So the
question is rather, "Look, radio waves are not like forms," to which
the answer is "Yes, that's exactly the problem." They are invisible,
like the forms, but unlike the forms they're destructible. And that's
precisely why we've got to worry about the soul. Is the soul invisible
in the way the forms are, being indestructible, or is it invisible in
the way that radio waves are, destructible? Now again, my point here is
not to say, "Oh, you idiot, Plato! Why didn't you think of radio
waves?" Our question is not, was Plato overlooking something he
should've thought of? It's, does his argument work or not? Is it true
that the invisible things can't be destroyed? And it seems to me that
some things that are invisible in the relevant sense, radio waves being
an example of that, can be destroyed. So even though the soul is also
invisible in the relevant sense, maybe it can be destroyed as well.</p>

<p>Now, the answer, it seems to me, the only answer I can imagine
Socrates or Plato giving at this point, is to say, "Look, I need a
different definition of invisible. Not two, but three. Don't talk about
what we can sense; talk about what we can detect." Radio waves can be
detected, right? After all, radios do that. You turn on your radio, the
radio wave's passing by, boom--properly tuned, you detect it. It turns
it into these sounds that we can hear. We can detect radio waves on the
basis of their effects on radios, among other things. So maybe by
invisible he should've moved to this stronger, bolder definition of
invisible. Let's call something invisible not only if it can't seen,
not only if it can't be observed, but if it can't be detected at all.
Look, the forms, after all, can't be detected. There's no radio for the
number three that will tell--There's no Geiger counter to tell you the
number three is nearby or something, right? So Plato could still insist
things that are invisible, in the sense of undetectable, can't be
destroyed. But radio waves, they're detectable. So they're not a
counterexample, now that we interpret the relevant notion of
invisibility as undetectability.</p>

<p>So couldn't Plato continue to claim, things that are fully
invisible, meaning undetectable, those things can't be destroyed. Radio
waves aren't a counterexample to that. I think maybe Plato could say
that. But, if we give him four, where we read invisible as meaning
utterly undetectable, it's no longer so clear to me that we can give
him five. Is the soul invisible? Well, it was, when by invisibility we
meant can't be seen; it was, when by invisibility we meant can't be
tasted or touched or heard or smelled. But is it still invisible if by
invisibility we mean can't be detected? Is it true that the soul can't
be detected? I've got to say, I think it's no longer right. Once we
interpret invisibility that way, the soul is detectable in just the
way--not literally just the way, but in something similar to the
way--that radio waves are detectable. If you hook a radio wave up with
a radio, you can tell the radio is--radio wave--was there because of
what the radio's doing, giving off these sounds. If you hook a soul up
to a body, you can tell the soul is there by what the body is doing,
discussing philosophy with you. You detect the presence of your
friend's soul through its effects on your friend's body.</p>

<p>But that means the soul isn't really undetectable. But if the soul's
not really undetectable, it's not really invisible in the relevant
sense. And if it's not really invisible, then even if there is a notion
of invisible, such that things that are invisible in that sense can't
be destroyed, the soul's not invisible in that sense.</p>

<p>I've gone over this argument at such length because--I hope it's
clear--I think it's a pretty interesting argument. The argument from
simplicity is quite fascinating. The idea that you couldn't break the
soul if it didn't have parts, and the way to tell that it doesn't have
parts is because it's invisible, because invisible things can't have
parts, that's a quite difficult argument to pin down, does it work or
does it not work. But I think, as we think it all through, we have to
conclude it doesn't work. Okay.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
