
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 13 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">February 27, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Let me start by reviewing the problem
that we were considering last week. We were raising a difficulty for
the personality theory of personal identity according to which the key
to being the same person is having the very same ongoing, evolving
personality. And the difficulty was basically the problem of
duplication. That it seemed as though we could have more than one--call
it an individual--more than one body, that had the very same set of
memories, beliefs and so forth. And that we have to ask ourselves,
"Well, what should the personality theory say about a case like
that?"</p>

<p>So imagine that over the weekend, the mad scientist copied my
memories, beliefs, desires, fears, ambitions, goals, intentions and
imprinted that on somebody else's brain. They did it last night at
midnight. This morning, we woke up. And we have to ask ourselves,
"Who's Shelly Kagan? Who's the person that was lecturing to you last
week?" Well, it doesn't seem plausible in terms of the personality
theory to say that <i>he's</i> Shelly Kagan, and the one here
today--Suppose the other one's in Michigan. If the one in Michigan's
Shelly Kagan but this one's not--After all, although it's true that
he's got Shelly Kagan's memories, he woke up thinking he was Shelly
Kagan, just like I woke up thinking I was Shelly Kagan. He woke up
thinking about what he was going to lecture on in class today, just
like I woke up thinking about what I was going to lecture in class
today. He remembered last week's lecture just like I remembered last
week's lecture.</p>

<p>Well, no clear reason to say--for the personality theory to
say--that he's Shelly Kagan and I'm not. After all, I've got the very
same set of memories, beliefs, desires that he has. But equally true,
and more surprisingly, from the personality theory point of view,
there's no reason to say that <i>I'm</i> Shelly Kagan and <i>he's</i>
not. After all, he's got all the same memories, beliefs and desires
that I do. It doesn't seem plausible to say we're <i>both</i> Shelly
Kagan, because now we'd have to then say Shelly Kagan's in two places
at the same time. So the only alternative seems to be to say that
neither of us is Shelly Kagan. But if neither of us is Shelly Kagan,
then the simple original personality theory was false. Because
according to that theory, having the personality is what it took to be
Shelly Kagan. We both have it, yet neither of us is Shelly Kagan. The
personality theory must be false.</p>

<p>So we revise the personality theory to say, the secret to personal
identity is having the same personality--provided that there's no
branching. Provided there's no splitting. Provided there's only one
best competitor, not two equally good candidates. Given the no
branching view, the no branching rule, we can say, in the ordinary
case, look, there really wasn't anybody imprinted with my memories and
desires in Michigan. I'm the only one around in the earth right now
with Shelly Kagan's memories and desires. Since there's no competitor,
and I've got the personality, I'm Shelly Kagan. I'm the very same
person that was here lecturing to you last week. That's what the
personality theory--It gives us the answer we're looking for in the
ordinary case. But in the science fiction story where there's a
duplicate, it says, uh, if there's branching, the no branching rule
comes in. Neither of them is Shelly Kagan.</p>

<p>All right, so that's the best way for the personality theory to get
revised to deal with this problem. The trouble was, it seems the no
branching rule seems very counter-intuitive. So think about it. Here,
right now I'm standing in front of you saying I'm Shelly Kagan, the guy
who was lecturing to you last week. I believe I'm Shelly Kagan, the guy
who was lecturing to you last week. Am I Shelly Kagan? Well, I've got
Shelly Kagan's personality. So far so good. Now all we have to decide
is, was the branching rule satisfied or violated? So all we have to
know is, is there somebody else somewhere in the universe who's got all
my memories and beliefs and desires? Well, how in the world could I
know that?</p>

<p>Whether I, this person talking to you right now, is Shelly Kagan
depends on whether there's some duplicate with all my memories in
Michigan or not? It seems very counter-intuitive. So although the
personality with no branching rule avoids the problem of what to say
about duplicates, by saying when there's branching, neither of them is
Shelly Kagan, the branching rule itself seems very counter-intuitive.
We feel as though whether somebody is me or not should depend upon
internal facts about me in the earlier stages or this stage and that
stage, not about what's happening elsewhere, outside, extrinsic to
these things. So, if you're not willing to accept the no branching
rule, if it strikes you as a bizarre thing to throw in to personal
identity, maybe you need to reject the personality theory.</p>

<p>Now during all of this, the fans of the body view typically are
laughing. They say this just goes to show what a dumb theory the
personality theory is. The whole problem with the personality theory is
that personality is a bit like a software. It's like programs. It's the
various programs you run on your computer along with the various data
files that you have saved on your hard drive, and so forth. And those
can be duplicated. You have copy after copy after copy. You can have
two copies of my personality. You could have 100 or 1,000. The problem
with--what drove the personality theory into the no branching rule,
implausible as it may be, was the fact that your personality is like
software, and it can be copied.</p>

<p>That's why, they say, we should believe in the body view. If we
accept the body view, we avoid the duplication problem. Because, unlike
software, which can be literally copied, as many as you want identical,
the body can't split. Human bodies can't divide or branch. There's no
way that there's another body, that the body on Thursday became two
bodies. The body that was here on Thursday didn't, couldn't become two
bodies. So we avoid all the problem. That's at least the kind of claim
that fans of the body view often make in the face of this difficulty
for the personality theory.</p>

<p>Well, now we need to ask, is it really true? Is it really true that
bodies don't face a duplication problem? Is it really true that human
bodies don't and couldn't split? Look, the crucial word here is, of
course, "couldn't." Personalities don't actually split either, right?
Although I've been giving science fiction examples in which the mad
scientist duplicates my memories and beliefs and desires, they've all
been science fiction examples. If I can use science fiction to talk
about the possibility of splitting, and use that against the
personality theory, I'm entitled to use science fiction examples to
talk about the possibility of bodies splitting, and ask, what kind of
problem that would raise for the body theory?</p>

<p>Now, we are familiar with some low-level examples of bodies
splitting. Amoebas split, right? You've got a single amoeba. It's going
along. At a certain point--Let's draw our amoeba splitting, right? [See
Figure 13.1] You've got an amoeba split, going along. At a certain
point, it starts to look like that. Then it looks like that. And then
boom! You've got, well, it splits. There's nothing in biology per se
that rules out cell division. Indeed, on the contrary, right? We know
cells can split. Now, human bodies, unlike amoebas, don't do that. But
maybe there's nothing in biology that rules out the possibility.
Suppose we open up the <em>Yale Daily</em> tomorrow and we see that the
Yale Center for Amoebic Studies has made this tremendous breakthrough
and has discovered how to, through the right kind of injection or
whatever, cause a human body to replicate and split in an amoeba-like
fashion. Well, then we have to face the problem of what to say in this
case of bodily branching.</p>

<p>Well, instead of pursuing that example, let me give you a slightly
different example that's been discussed a fair bit in the philosophical
literature. This is actually a case that one of the students in the
class asked about, I think it was last week, if it wasn't even earlier.
And I said, "Great question. Let's come back to it." So here, at long
last, I'm making good on my promissory note. I'm going to come back to
the example that was raised before.</p>

<p>You'll recall that when we talked about the body view, I said the
best version of the body view doesn't require the entire body, to be
the same body, but the brain. Follow the brain. And indeed, it doesn't
seem as though we have to require the entire brain, just enough of the
brain, however much that turns out, to house personality, memories and
so forth. And then, I said, suppose it was possible that one hemisphere
of your brain is enough. If there's enough redundancy in the brain so
that even if your right hemisphere got destroyed, your left hemisphere,
you still have all the same memories, desires, beliefs. Good
enough.</p>

<p>So now we worry about the following case. So I gave you a bunch of
examples, right, where there are brains being transplanted into torsos
of others. So suppose, gruesome as it was, this weekend I'm in some
horrible accident and my torso gets destroyed and they keep my brain on
life support, oxygenating it just long enough to do some radical
surgery into some spare torsos. Where'd the torsos come from? Well, you
had some living people, but they had very rare brain diseases and their
brain suddenly liquefied. So now we've got some spare torsos.</p>

<p>All right, so here we've got Shelly Kagan. His body gets destroyed.
And here's my brain. Over here we've got Jones' torso. And over here
we've got Smith's torso. Suppose we take, call this one the left
hemisphere, and we stick it in here, into Jones' torso. We take this
other hemisphere, the right half of my brain and we stick it into
Smith's torso. We connect all the wires, all the neurons. The
operation's a smashing success. Both things wake up. So here's Jones'
torso with the left half of SK's brain. Smith's torso with the right
half of SK's brain. They wake up. We need some way to refer to these
people, so we can start talking about who they are. Let me just call
this top one--Jones' torso with the left half of Shelly Kagan's
brain--let's call him Lefty. Smith's torso with the right half of
Shelly Kagan's brain, let's call him Righty. [See Figure 13.2]</p>

<p>Okay, operation's a success. Lefty and Righty both wake up. They
both think they're Shelly Kagan, and so forth and so on. And we ask
ourselves, according to the body view, which one is Shelly Kagan?</p>

<p>What are the possibilities? We could say Lefty is Shelly Kagan and
Righty is not. Righty's an imposter. But there's nothing in the body
view to give us a reason to make that choice. It's true that Lefty's
got half of Shelly Kagan's brain and that's good enough. But it's also
true that Righty's got half of Shelly Kagan's brain and that seems good
enough. So there's no reason to say that Lefty is Shelly Kagan and
Righty isn't. And similarly, of course, there's nothing in the body
view to make us say that Righty is Shelly Kagan and Lefty isn't.</p>

<p>Well, if it's not one, and not the other, what are the remaining
possibilities? We could, I suppose, try to say they're <i>both</i>
Shelly Kagan. And so Shelly Kagan continues, that is to say his body
continues, that is to say his brain continues, that is to say enough of
his brain continues, merrily on its way, except now in two places. And
so from now on, Shelly Kagan, that single person, is in two different
places at the same time. Lefty goes to California. Righty moves to
Vermont. From now on, Shelly Kagan's bicoastal. It doesn't seem
right.</p>

<p>So what else can the body theory say? Well, the body theory could
say <i>neither</i> of them are Shelly Kagan. Shelly Kagan died in that
gruesome, horrible accident. Although it's true that we now have two
people, Lefty and Righty, each of whom has half of Shelly Kagan's
brain, and all of Shelly Kagan's memories, for whatever that's worth,
neither of them is Shelly Kagan. We could say that as well. But if
we--and that seems the least unpalatable of the alternatives. But if we
say that, then we've given up on the body view. Because the body view,
after all, said to be Shelly Kagan is to have enough of Shelly Kagan's
brain. And in this case, both of Lefty and Righty seem to have enough
of Shelly Kagan's brain. What's the body theorist to do?</p>

<p>As far as I can see, the best option for the body theorist at this
point is to add--no surprises here--a no branching rule. The body
theorist should say, "The key to personal identity is having the same
body, to wit, the same brain, to wit, enough of the brain to keep the
personality going--provided that there's no branching, no splitting, no
perfect competitors, only one." If the body view adds the no branching
principle, then we can say, look, in the case of this sort of
splitting--This example is known in theto philosophical literature as
fission, like nuclear fission when a big atom splits into two. So, in
the fission case, the body says, the body theorist says, in the fission
case, there's splitting, there's branching. So neither of them is going
to end up being Shelly Kagan.</p>

<p>But in the ordinary humdrum case, here I am, my body. Why am I
Shelly Kagan? Because the brain in front of you--you can't see it, but
it's in front of you--the brain in front of you is the very same brain
as the brain that you had in front of you on Thursday. Follow the body,
in particular follow the brain. So in the ordinary case, no splitting,
follow the brain. In the special case where there's splitting, even if
you follow the brain, not good enough. So the body theorist can avoid
the problem of fission, avoid the problem of duplication by adding the
no branching rule.</p>

<p>But of course, the no branching rule didn't seem very intuitive.
Whether or not I'm Shelly Kagan, the guy that was lecturing to you on
Thursday, depends on whether, unbeknownst to me, over the weekend,
somebody removed half of my brain, stuck it in some other torso, sealed
me all back up. How could that matter?</p>

<p>Well, if you don't find the no branching rule plausible, you're in
trouble as a body theorist. In fact, so what we see is, the body theory
is in exactly the same problem, exactly the same situation, as the
personality theory. Indeed, the fission example is a very nice case of
how you could have splitting for the personality theory. Here, before
the accident, was Shelly Kagan, somebody who had my beliefs, desires,
memories, goals, and so forth. After the accident, we've got two
people, Lefty and Righty, or two entities, Lefty and Righty, both of
whom have Shelly Kagan's memories, beliefs, desires, goals, and so
forth. Splitting the brain shows how you could, in fact, have splitting
of personality. So the very same case raises the very same problem for
both the body view and the personality view. And the only solution that
I can see, at least the best solution that I can see, is to accept the
no branching rule. If you don't like the no branching rule, it's not
clear what your alternatives are. Or at least, it is clear what your
alternatives are; it's not clear which alternative would be any
better.</p>

<p>Now during all of this--problems for the personality theory,
problems for the body view--during all of this, the soul theorist is
having a field day. The soul theorist is saying, "Look you guys, you
got into all this trouble with splitting and so forth and so on, and
needing to add the no branching rule, silly and implausible as that
seems, you got into all that trouble because of the problem of
splitting because personalities can be split, bodies can be split. If
only you had seen the light and stuck to the soul theory of personal
identity, all these problems could be avoided." Now, as you know, I
don't believe in souls. But forget that issue for the moment. Let's
just ask the question, "Is it true that the soul theory--if only there
were souls--is it true that the soul theory would at least have the
following advantage? It avoids these problems of duplication and
fission."</p>

<p>Well let's ask. What should a soul theorist say about the fission
case? So here's the gruesome accident. My brain gets split apart. One
part gets put into Jones' torso. One part gets put into Smith's torso.
After the operation, Lefty wakes up thinking he's Shelly Kagan. Smith
wakes up thinking he's Shelly Kagan. Lefty's got part of Shelly Kagan's
brain. Smith's, or rather Righty's got part of Shelly Kagan's brain.
What should the soul theorist say about the case of fission? Well,
again, remember, the soul theory says the key to being the same person
is having the soul. Why am I the person that was lecturing to you on
Thursday? Because it's the very same soul animating my body, or what
have you.</p>

<p>So, what does the soul theorist say about the fission case? I'm not
quite sure, because we have to turn to a metaphysical question that
we've touched upon before, namely, can souls split? After all, the
problem that fission raises for the personality theory, in a nutshell,
is that personalities can split, they can branch. The problem for the
body view that fission raises, in a nutshell, is that bodies can split.
They can branch. We need to ask about the metaphysics of the soul, can
souls split? And I don't know the answer to that, of course. So let's
consider both possibilities.</p>

<p>Possibility number one. Souls, just like bodies, just like
personalities, can split. Suppose that's what happened. So, there was a
single soul here, Shelly Kagan's soul, but in the middle of this
gruesome operation, gruesome accident and followed by this amazing
operation, Shelly Kagan's soul split. So there's one of the SK souls
over here and there's one of the SK souls in the other case as well.
Each one of Lefty and Righty has one of the pieces of the split Shelly
Kagan soul.</p>

<p>All right, so now we ask ourselves, "According to the soul theory,
which one is Shelly Kagan?" Well, you--By this point, you can run
through all the possibilities yourself, right? We could say, well, it's
Lefty and not Righty. But there's nothing in the soul theory that
supports that claim. They each have an equally good--however good it
may be--they've got an equally good piece of the original Shelly Kagan
soul. So there's no reason to say that Lefty is Shelly Kagan and Righty
isn't. There's no good reason to say Righty is Shelly Kagan and Lefty
isn't.</p>

<p>Well, would it be better to say they're <i>both</i> Shelly Kagan, as
long as you've got a piece of Shelly Kagan's soul, of the original
soul, then you just are Shelly Kagan? In which case, Lefty and Righty
are both Shelly Kagan, and Shelly Kagan is now bicoastal, one in
California, one in Vermont, one part of him? That doesn't seem very
satisfying.</p>

<p>What's the alternative? The alternative, it seems, for the soul
theorist, is to say, <i>neither</i> of them is Shelly Kagan. Neither of
them is Shelly Kagan, then Shelly Kagan died. But how can we say that
if we accept the soul theory? They both have pieces of Shelly Kagan's
soul. The soul split. Well, maybe what the soul theorist would have to
do at this point is accept the--da-ta-da--the no branching rule. "Ah,"
says the soul theorist, "Follow the soul--unless the soul splits, in
which case neither of them is Shelly Kagan." Well, the trouble is, we
didn't find the no branching rule very plausible. It seemed
counterintuitive.</p>

<p>But at this point, you begin to wonder, maybe we just need to learn
to live with it. If the personality theory needs the no branching rule,
and the body theory needs the no branching rule, and the soul theory
needs the no branching rule, maybe we're just stuck with the no
branching rule, whether or not we like it. And if we're stuck with it,
then of course it's not an objection against any one of the theories
that uses it. Well, this is all what we would say as soul theorists if
we think souls can split.</p>

<p>But we need to consider the possibility that souls can't split.
Maybe the soul theorist has an alternative available to it
that--available to him that the other theories don't have. Suppose
Shelly Kagan's soul cannot split. What does that mean? It means, when
my brain gets split, my soul is going to end up in Lefty or in Righty,
but not in both. If a soul can't split, you can't end up with pieces of
the soul or the remnants of the soul in both. The soul is a unified
simple thing.</p>

<p>Now, I don't actually know whether it's true that simple things
can't split. Metaphysically, I'm not sure whether that's a possibility
or not. But let's just suppose--look, Plato argued the soul was simple.
He didn't actually convince me of that, but suppose we thought souls
are simple, and we think simple things can't split. It would follow,
then, that souls can't split.</p>

<p>Suppose we accept all that metaphysics. Then the question is just,
which one is Shelly Kagan? Well, it depends which one ended up with
Shelly Kagan's soul. We can't say, they both have a piece. One of them
will have it, the other one won't. And you want to know which one's
Shelly Kagan? The one that actually ends up with Shelly Kagan's soul.
If Lefty ends up with Shelly Kagan's soul, then Lefty is Shelly Kagan
and Righty is an imposter. He thinks he's Shelly Kagan, but he's not,
because he doesn't have Shelly Kagan's soul. Lefty has it. If Righty's
got Shelly Kagan's soul, then Righty is Shelly Kagan and Lefty is the
imposter.</p>

<p>Now, looking at the situation from the outside, we might be unable
to tell which one is really Shelly Kagan. Because we won't be able to
tell, looking at it from the outside, which one really has Shelly
Kagan's soul. Although it will be true, whichever one really does have
Shelly Kagan's soul is Shelly Kagan. But we don't know which one that
is.</p>

<p>Interestingly, and somewhat more surprisingly, looking at it from
the inside, we won't be able to tell either. Lefty will say, "Give me a
break. Of course I'm Shelly Kagan. Of course I've got Shelly Kagan's
soul. Of course I'm the one." But Righty will also say, "Give me a
break. Of course I'm Shelly Kagan. Of course I've got Shelly Kagan's
soul. Of course I'm the one." If souls can't split, one of them is
mistaken. But there's no way for them to know which one is the one
that's deceived.</p>

<p>Now, that may not be a problem that you're unwilling to swallow. As
we've seen, all the views here have their difficulties. Maybe that's
the difficulty you're prepared to accept. What's the right answer in
fission? It depends on who's got Shelly Kagan's soul. No way to tell.
But still, that's the answer to the metaphysical question.
Question?</p>

<p><b>Student:</b> What happens if neither of these had Shelly Kagan's
soul?</p>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> The question was, "What if neither of
these have Shelly Kagan's soul?" Then they're both imposters. That's a
little bit like the case we worried about when we started thinking
about the soul view, right? What if last night God destroyed my soul
and put in a new soul? Then Shelly Kagan died. If Shelly Kagan's soul
does not migrate to Lefty or Righty, neither of them is Shelly Kagan,
according to the soul theory. What happened to Shelly Kagan? Well, if
the soul got destroyed, Shelly Kagan died. If the soul didn't get
destroyed, maybe somebody else that we weren't even looking at is
Shelly Kagan.</p>

<p>So as I say, the soul theory can at least give us an answer that
avoids the no branching rule. If souls are simples and simples can't
split, there's no possibility of having two things with a relevant
soul. So we don't need to add, in this <i>ad hoc</i> fashion, the no
branching rule. That's an advantage for the soul theory, if only we
believed in souls. It is an advantage. But I need to point out that
there's another disadvantage that the fission case raises for the soul
theory.</p>

<p>So let's just suppose that metaphysically God tells us that it's
Lefty that has Shelly Kagan's soul. Then of course it's Lefty that is
Shelly Kagan. Righty is an imposter. Righty believes he's Shelly Kagan,
he has all the memories of Shelly Kagan, all the desires of Shelly
Kagan, but he's not Shelly Kagan because he doesn't have Shelly Kagan's
soul. Lefty happens to have it. That's a nice answer to the problem of
fission, but notice the problem it raises for the argument for
believing in a soul in the first place.</p>

<p>Way back at the start of the semester when we asked, "Why believe in
souls?" one important argument was, or really family of arguments was,
you need to believe in souls in order to explain why bodies are
animated, why people are rational, how they can have personalities, how
they can be creative, and so forth. In order to explain consciousness
and self-awareness. Whatever it was, fill in your favorite blank, fill
in the blank in your favorite way. The claim was, you needed to believe
in souls in order to explain all that.</p>

<p>But if that's right, what's going on in Righty's case? Righty is
aware. Righty is conscious. Righty is creative. Righty has free will.
Righty makes plans. Righty's got personality. Righty is rational.
Righty's body is animated. According to the soul-theory argument for
soul, rather, according to the argument for souls, you needed to
believe in souls in order to explain how you could have a person. But
now Righty's a person without a soul, because we just hypothesized, oh,
Shelly Kagan's soul's up there. So at the very same moment that
positing the nonsplitting of souls seems to solve the fission problem
of duplication, it yanks the rug out from underneath the soul theorist
by undermining one of the types of arguments for believing in the soul
in the first place. After all, if Righty can be a person, admittedly
not Shelly Kagan, but a person--conscious, creative, rational, so
forth, aware--without a soul, then maybe the same thing is true for us,
which is of course what the physicalist says.</p>

<p>Let me mention one other possibility, because it's quite intriguing.
Suppose the soul theorist answers that last objection by saying, "Ain't
ever going to happen." Yeah, it would be a problem for believing in
souls if Righty could wake up without one. But since we stipulated that
Shelly Kagan's soul is going to end up in Lefty, Righty is not going to
wake up. Alternatively, it might have been that Righty woke up, but
Lefty doesn't wake up, doesn't survive the operation. Suppose we did
these sort of brain transfers all the time and the following thing
always happened. Transfer the entire brain, the patient wakes up.
Transfer one hemisphere, the patient wakes up. Transfer both
hemispheres, one patient or the other wakes up, but never both. If that
happened, we'd have a great new argument for the existence of a soul.
What could possibly explain why either hemisphere of the brain would
normally be enough, as long as we don't transfer both? When we transfer
both, one hemisphere might work sometimes, sometimes the other
hemisphere, but never both. What could possibly explain that? Souls
could explain that. If souls can't split, it can only follow one half
of the brain, and that's why we'll get somebody that's got one half,
sometimes the other half, but never both halves.</p>

<p>So there's a kind of empirical argument for the existence of the
soul if we found those kinds of results. Of course, that's a big "if."
Please don't go away thinking that what I just said is, here's a new
argument for the soul. We don't do brain transfers, let alone have a
half-a-brain transfers. We don't have any experiments that suggest one
half wakes up, but not the other half. All I'm saying is that if
someday we found that, at that point, we'd have an argument for the
soul.</p>

<p>Well again, let me put away the soul theory again. I was exploring
it because it's interesting to think about its implication. But since I
don't believe in souls, I want to choose between the body view and the
personality view. Both of them, as we saw in the face of fission, needs
to accept a no branching rule. If they're going to survive thinking
about this case at all, we need to throw in a no branching rule.
Whether or not you find the no branching rule hard to believe, if both
views are stuck with it, well, then we're stuck with it. So let's try
to choose between the personality theory with the no branching rule and
the body theory with the no branching rule. Which of these should we
accept? Which of these is the better theory of personal identity?
Answer, "I'm not sure."</p>

<p>Over the course of my philosophical career, I have moved back and
forth between them. There was certainly a long period of time in which
I found the personality theory, that is, the personality theory with a
no branching rule, to be the better and more plausible theory. And it
certainly has any number of advocates on the contemporary philosophical
scene. But at other times in my philosophical career, I have found the
body theory, that is to say, the body theory with the no branching
rule, to be the more plausible theory. And it is certainly the case
that the body theory has its advocates among contemporary
philosophers.</p>

<p>For what it's worth--and I don't actually think that what I'm about
to say is worth all that much--I'm going to share with you my own pet
belief. These days I'm inclined to go with the body theory. I'm
inclined to think that the key to personal identity is having the same
body, as long as there's no branching, as long as there's no splitting.
But it's certainly open to you to decide that you think no, no, the
personality theory is the stronger view. I can't settle the question. I
don't have any more philosophical arguments up my sleeve on this issue.
But I do have another point that's worth considering. Although I'm
inclined to think that the body theory may be the best view about
what's the key to personal identity, I'm also inclined to think it
doesn't really matter.</p>

<p>We've been posing the following question. We've been asking, "What
does it take for it to be true that I survive?" And it may be that what
we should conclude is, whatever the best answer to that question is,
it's not the question we should really have been thinking about. We
weren't going to be in a position to see that until we went through all
the stuff we've been going over for the last couple of weeks. But now
that we're here, we're in a position perhaps to raise the question,
should we be asking what it takes to <i>survive</i>? Or should we be
asking about what <i>matters</i> in survival?</p>

<p>Now, in posing this question, I'm obviously presupposing that we can
draw a distinction between the question, "Do I survive? Is somebody
that exists in the future, whatever, me?" and the question, "What was
it that I <i>wanted,</i> when I wanted to survive? What was it that
mattered in ordinary survival?" And it might be that these things can
actually come apart. To see this, suppose we start by thinking again
about the soul view. Suppose there are souls. I don't believe in them,
but let's imagine. Suppose there are souls. And suppose that souls are
the key to personal identity. So somebody is me if they've got my soul.
Or, to put it more straightforwardly, next week the person that's me is
the person with my soul. I survive as long as there's somebody around
with my soul. A hundred years from now, am I still around? Well, if my
soul's still around, that's me. That's what the soul theory says. And
suppose it's the truth.</p>

<p>Now, consider the following possibility. Suppose that people can be
reincarnated. That is to say, at the death of their body, their soul
takes over, animates, inhabits, gets connected to a new body that's
being born. But, unlike the kind of reincarnation cases that get talked
about in popular culture and various religions where, at least under
the right circumstances, you can remember your prior lives, let's
imagine that when the soul is reincarnated, it's scrubbed completely
clean, no traces whatsoever of the earlier life. No way to retrieve it.
No karmic similarities of personality or anything, just starts over
like a blank slate. Like a blackboard that's been completely erased, we
now have the very same blackboard, and now we start writing new things
on it. Imagine that that's the way reincarnation worked.</p>

<p>So somebody asks you, "Will you still be around in 1,000 years?" The
answer's going to be, yes, because my soul will be reincarnated. In
1,000 years there'll be somebody that has the very same soul that's
animating my body right now. Of course, that soul won't remember being
Shelly Kagan. It won't have any memories of its prior life. It won't be
like Shelly Kagan in any way in terms of Shelly Kagan's desires or
ambitions or goals or fears. It won't be that--We can see why that
personality emerges through karmic cause and effect in any way that are
a function of what I was like in my life. It'll be Shelly Kagan,
because it's Shelly Kagan's soul, but with no overlap of personality,
memories, anything.</p>

<p>Then I want to say, who cares? The fact that I will survive under
those circumstances doesn't give me anything that matters to me. It's
no comfort to me to be told I will survive, because after all, the soul
is the key to personal identity, if there's no similar personality, no
memories, no beliefs, no retrievable memories of past lives. Then who
cares that it's me?</p>

<p>If you can feel the force of that thought, then you're seeing how
the question "Will I survive?" can be separated out from the question
"What matters?" What do we care about? Bare survival of my soul, even
though that is the key to personal identity--if it is--bare survival of
my soul doesn't give me what I want.</p>

<p>It's no more comforting or satisfying than if you said, "You know
this knucklebone? After you die, we're going to do knucklebone surgery
and implant that knucklebone in somebody else's body. And that
knucklebone is going to survive." And I say, "Oh, that's very
interesting that that knucklebone will be around 100 or 1,000 years
from now. But who cares?" And if the knucklebone theory of personal
identity gets proposed and somebody said, "Oh, yes, but you see, that
person now with that knucklebone will be you, because the key to
personal identity is having the very same knucklebone." I say, "All
right, so it's me. Who cares?" Bare knucklebone survival does not give
me what matters.</p>

<p>Now, the knucklebone theory of personal identity is a very stupid
theory. In contrast, the soul theory of personal survival is not a
stupid theory. But for all that, it doesn't give me what I want. When
you think about the possibility of bare survival of the scrubbed,
clean, erased soul, you see that survival wasn't really everything you
wanted. What you wanted--at least what I want, I invite you to ask
yourself whether you want the same thing--what I want is not just
survival, but survival with the same <i>personality</i>. So even if the
soul theory is the correct theory of personality, it's not enough to
give me what matters. What matters isn't just survival. It's survival
with the same personality.</p>

<p>Let's consider the body view. Suppose that the body theory of
personal identity is correct. And to be me, there's got to be somebody
there that's got my body. Let's suppose the brain version of the theory
is the best version. And so next year, there's going to be somebody
that's got my brain. But let's imagine that the brain has been scrubbed
clean. All memory traces have been completely erased. We're talking
complete irreversible amnesia, complete erasure of the brain's hard
drive. No traces of desires and memories and intentions and beliefs to
eventually be recovered if only we have the right surgery, or
procedure, or psychotherapy, or what have you. It's gone.</p>

<p>Now, that thing that wakes up after this complete irreversible
amnesia will no doubt eventually develop a personality, a set of
beliefs, memories. Nobody knows who it is, so they call it, they find
it wandering on the streets. They call it John Doe. John Doe will
eventually have a bunch of beliefs about how the world works, make some
plans, get some memories. According to the body theory, that's me. And
if the body theory is correct, well by golly, it is me. And all I can
say in response to that is, it's me, but who cares? So what? I'm not
comforted by the thought that I will still be around 50 years from now,
if the thing that's me doesn't have my personality.</p>

<p>Mere bodily survival isn't enough to give me what I want. I want
more than mere bodily survival. I want to survive with the same
personality. So even if the body theory of personal identity is the
right theory, what I want to say in response to that is, "So what?" If
the really crucial question is not "Do I survive," but "Do I have what
I wanted when I wanted to survive?" the answer is the body theory
doesn't give it. I don't just want to survive. I want to survive with
the same personality.</p>

<p>Should we conclude, therefore, that the key to the important
question--namely, "What matters?"--the answer to that question, should
we conclude, is, same personality? That's a question we'll have to take
up next time.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
