
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 10 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">February 15, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> At the end of last class, I suggested
that from here on out I'm going to be assuming that there is no soul.
I'm going to be discussing the issues that we turn to hereafter from
the perspective of the physicalist, the person who says that a person
is basically just a fancy body--a body that can do certain special
tricks, a body that can function in certain ways that we associate with
being a person, a body that can P-function, as we put it.</p>

<p>Now, I've given you my reasons for believing there are no souls.
Basically, that the various arguments that might be offered for
believing in souls don't seem very compelling upon examination, so
there's no good reason to posit this extra entity. For the most part,
then, I'm going to be putting aside soul talk. Periodically, I'll come
back and talk about how some issue that we are considering might look
from the perspective of somebody who does believe in souls. But, as I
say, for the most part, I'm going to be assuming there are no souls.
For those of you who still do believe in the existence of souls, I
suppose you could take a great deal of the discussion that follows as
some form of large conditional or subjunctive. If there were no souls,
then here's what we'd have to say. So although I'll be largely talking
from the perspective of the physicalist, if you haven't become
convinced of the truth of physicalism, so be it. We'll at least explore
what will we say about death if we've decided that people are basically
just bodies?</p>

<p>Now, you'll recall that at the start of the semester I said, in
thinking about the question, could I survive my death? there were two
basic things we had to get clear on. First, we had to get clear on,
what am I? What are my parts? That's why we spent the last several
weeks worrying about the question, am I just a body? Am I a body and an
immaterial soul as well? Or perhaps, strictly speaking, just the soul?
Having looked at that question, we're now going to turn to the second
basic question, what would it be to survive? What would it be for a
thing like that to continue to exist? Now, of course, we're going to
ask most particularly, what would it be for a thing like that to
survive the death of the body? Could it even make sense for a person to
survive the death of his body? You might think the answer to that is
no, if we are physicalists, but in fact, it's not so clear the answer
to that is no.</p>

<p>But in order to address that particular question--What is for me to
survive the death of my body? Is that even a possibility or not?--we
first have to get clear about the more general question, what is it for
me to survive, period? Take the more familiar hum-drum case. Here I am
lecturing to you today, Thursday. Somebody's going to be here, no
doubt, lecturing to you next week, next Tuesday. The question of
survival can be asked about that very simple case. Is the person who's
going to be lecturing to you on Tuesday the very same person as the
person who is standing in front of you lecturing to you now? Will that
person survive the weekend? I certainly expect to survive the weekend.
But what is it to survive the weekend? What is it?</p>

<p>We might say, look, we've already got the beginnings of an answer.
For me to survive until Tuesday, presumably is for there to be
somebody, some person alive lecturing to you on Tuesday, and--here's
the crucial point--for that person lecturing to you on Tuesday to be
the very same person as the person lecturing to you today, on Thursday.
If I were to be killed in a plane accident this weekend and there was a
guest lecturer for you on Tuesday, there'd be somebody alive lecturing
to you. But, of course, that wouldn't be me. So the question we want to
get clear on is, what is it for somebody on Tuesday to be the same
person as the person here talking to you on Thursday? We can ask the
question more grandly, about larger expanses of time. Suppose there's
somebody alive 40-odd years from now, in the year 2050. Could that be
me? To ask, have I survived until 2050? is to ask, is that person who's
alive in 2050 the very same person as the person who's standing here
now lecturing to you? What is it for somebody in the future to be the
very same person as this person who's here now today?</p>

<p>Now, in thinking about this question, it's important not to
misunderstand what we're asking. Some of you may misunderstand what I'm
asking. Some of you may want to say, "Look, the person lecturing to you
now has at least a fair bit of his hair. He's got a beard. Let's
suppose that the person alive in 2050 is bald and bent over, has no
beard. How could they be the same person? One's got hair, one doesn't.
One's got a beard, one doesn't. One stands straight, one's crooked. It
can't be the same person." That's the mistake that it's important for
us to get clear about. So I'm going to spend some time talking about
examples that I think we would not find puzzling, and work our way back
up to the case of personal identity. So first I'm going to say some
things about identity across time--or indeed initially, identity across
space--with some familiar, hum-drum, material objects. So, let's
start.</p>

<p>Suppose you and I are walking along and we see a train. So let me
draw the train first. I'm not a very good artist, but all right.
There's our train. We start walking. I point to the caboose. Let's make
this look more like a caboose, slightly more like a caboose. Just so it
doesn't look too much like the locomotive. [See Figure 10.1] I point to
the caboose and I say, "Look at that train." And we're walking along,
we're walking along, we're walking along. We come to the end of the
train and I point to the locomotive and I say, "Wow! Look how long that
train is! That's the very same train I pointed to five minutes ago.
We've been walking along it all this time."</p>

<p>Now, imagine that you say--you wouldn't say anything as stupid as
this, but imagine that you said this--you say, "This isn't the same
train as the train we pointed to five minutes ago. After all, right now
what you're pointing to is a locomotive, whereas five minutes ago what
you pointed to was a caboose. A caboose isn't the same thing as a
locomotive. How could you possibly say it's the same thing? Who could
possibly make a mistake like that? The locomotive's got smoke coming
out of it. The caboose doesn't. And so forth and so on. There's a lot
of differences between the two. How could you make such a silly
mistake?"</p>

<p>Well, of course, what I would then want to say to you is, no,
actually, you're the one who's making the mistake. I agree, of course,
that a locomotive is not the same thing as a caboose. But I wasn't
claiming that it was. Rather, initially when we started our walk, I
pointed to a caboose, but by pointing to the caboose, I picked out a
train. I said, "Look at that train." And what I was referring to wasn't
just the caboose, but the whole, long, extended-through-space object,
the train, of which the caboose was just a part. And when--At the end
of our walk when I pointed to a locomotive and said, "Look at that
train," by pointing to the locomotive, I was picking out a train, an
entire train. This long, extended-through-space object, the train. And
when I said, "This train that I'm pointing to now is the very same
train as the train I pointed to five minutes ago," I'm not saying what
is certainly false. I'm not saying the locomotive is the same thing as
the caboose. Rather, what I'm saying is, the entire
extended-through-space train that I'm pointing out now is the same
train as the entire extended-through-space train that I picked out five
minutes ago. And that claim, far from being false, is true.</p>

<p>Now, as I say, none of us would make that mistake. But it's a
tempting mistake if you're not being careful. And that mistake might
mislead us if we start thinking about the personal identity case. But
let's continue with the train for a bit. Suppose, as we're taking our
walk, part of the train isn't visible. There's a large warehouse that's
blocking the view. [See Figure 10.2] We're walking along the way. We
see a caboose. I say, "Ha! There's a train." Then for a while we're
walking, we don't see anything because all you can see is the
warehouse. And then after we get past the warehouse, a very long,
block-long warehouse, I see a locomotive and I say, "Hey look. There's
a train." And then I ask you, "Do you think this is the same train as
the train we pointed to before?" Now again, it's important not to
misunderstand that question. That question is not asking, is the
locomotive that we're pointing to now the same as the caboose that we
pointed to earlier? No, of course not. The locomotive's not the same as
the caboose. But that's not what I'm asking. What I'm asking rather is,
remember earlier when I pointed to the caboose?" In doing so, and I
started talking about a train, I was picking out some entire
extended-through-space train. Right now, in pointing to a locomotive,
I'm picking out not just the locomotive. I mean to be talking about an
entire train. Some entire extended-through-space train. And I'm asking
not about the locomotive and the caboose, but rather I'm asking about
the trains that I pick out by means of the locomotive and caboose. Are
they the same train? And the answer is, "Don't know; can't tell. The
building's blocking the view."</p>

<p>Suppose we had x-ray vision and could see through the building. Then
the answer would be, "Well look, if what we've got is something like
this [drawing], then of course, we do have one single train." [See
Figure 10.3] The extended-through-space train I picked out at the end
of our walk is the same as the extended-through-space train that I
picked out at the beginning of our walk. But it might not turn out that
way. It might turn out if I had x-ray vision, that what I'd see is this
[drawing]. [See Figure 10.4] Then the answer would be, "Ah, there's not
one train here, but two trains." The extended-through-space train that
I'm picking out when I point to the locomotive turns out to be a
different train from the extended-through-space train I picked out when
I pointed to the caboose. I don't have x-ray vision. I don't know which
of these metaphysical hypotheses is the correct one. All right, easy
enough with trains. We know how it works with trains.</p>

<p>Now let's talk about something not a whole lot more
complicated--cars. I used to have a car I bought in 1990. My ability to
draw cars is even worse than my ability to draw trains. There's my car
in 1990. It was new. It was sparkly. Then I drove it for some years and
I got some dents and so forth and so on. Here's a smile. By 1996 or
2000, it wasn't looking so good. The sparkle had gone. It had a couple
of dents. That was the car in 2000. By 2006, it had a lot of dents,
2006, when it finally died. [See Figure 10.5]</p>

<p>All right, now we all understand the claim that the car I had in
2006 was the very same car as the car I had in 1990. Of course, again,
you've got to be careful not to misunderstand what's being said. We all
know that in 2006 the car had a lot of scratches and had gotten banged
in on one side and pretty sorry looking in terms of the scrapes and the
paint job and the rust. Whereas, the car in 1990, new and shiny and
smooth. You might say the 2006 car stage is obviously not the same
thing as the 1990 car stage. That's like thinking that the locomotive's
the same thing as the caboose. But when I say it's the same car, I
don't mean to be talking about car stages. I mean to be talking about a
single thing that was extended through time.</p>

<p>There I am, proud owner of my new car in 1990 and I say, "This is a
car. It's a car that will exist for more than a few minutes. It's a car
that will exist for years and years and years," though at the time I
didn't realize it was going to last 16 years or longer. When I refer to
my car--as opposed to what we could dub the car stage or the car
slice--when I refer to the car in 1990, I mean to be talking about the
entire extended-through-time object. In 2006, when I point to that sad
heap and talk about, "I've had that car for 16 years." Well, I haven't
had that car stage for 16 years. That car stage or that car slice, if
we wanted to talk about it that way, has only been around for however
long, months, years, a year. It hasn't been around for 16 years. But
when I talk about that car, I'm picking not just the current slice or
the current stage of the car, but the entire extended-through-time
object. When I say, "That's the very same car I've had for 16 years," I
mean, "Think of the object extended through time that I'm picking out
by pointing to the current slice. That's the very same
extended-through-time object that I picked out 16 years ago by pointing
to what was then the current slice. The slices aren't the same; the
<i>car</i> is the same. It's the very same car."</p>

<p>Well, now let's imagine a somewhat more difficult case. At the end
of 2006, my engine failed. I sold the car to a dealer, junk dealer.
Suppose that in 2010 I see a car in the junk lot and it looks familiar
to me. [See Figure 10.6] I say, "Whoa! That's my car." Is it or isn't
it my car? This is sort of like the case with the factory blocking the
view. 1990 to 2006, very easy. Saw the car every day in my garage. But
here is a four-year--Instead of a factory blocking my view, it's the
mists of time blocking my view. And I ask, "Same car or not?" Again, by
this time, I imagine you don't need to be warned, but let me just warn
you a couple more times. I'm not asking, "Is the car stage, the 2010
car stage, the same car stage as the 2006 car stage? Maybe not. Maybe
obviously not. I'm asking rather, in pointing to the 2010 car stage, I
mean to be picking out an entire extended-through-time entity, the car.
And I'm asking, "Is that the very same extended-through-time entity as
the extended-through-time entity that I used to own?" I wonder. And the
answer is, "Don't know." The mists of time are blocking my view. I
don't know the answer. But we know what the possibilities are. One
possibility is that indeed it's the very same--I won't draw it all,
2008 and so forth. It could be the very same car. If we knew what it
took to have the various stages of a car add up to the very same car,
then that would be one possibility. [See Figure 10.7]</p>

<p>But there might be a different possibility. It could have been that
after I sold it to the junk dealer, he crushed it, turned it into a
heap of metal and that was the end of my car. And the car I'm seeing on
the dealer's lot in 2010 might be some other car with its own history.
[See Figure 10.8] What we're wondering about is, is there a
single--well, here's a piece of jargon--is there a single "space-time
worm" here or are there two? When I look at the car in 2010 and say,
"There's a car. I wonder if it's the same car," I'm asking about this
thing that's extended--well, obviously through space, since cars take
up some space--and through time. Looks a bit like a worm. So
philosophers call them space-time worms. Is the space-time worm that
makes up this car the same space-time worm as the one that made up my
car? One worm there or two? And the answer might be, "Don't know, need
to have more facts." But at least that's what the question is.</p>

<p>Now metaphysically, there's different ways of trying to pose the set
of issues that I've begun to talk about. Should we say, as we might say
with the train, the train is made up out of the various cars, the
locomotive, the caboose, and the intervening cars? So the train--that's
the way we normally think about trains, at least the way I normally
think about trains--the train's a bit like a sandwich, right? The
metaphysically fundamental things are the caboose, the locomotives, the
intervening trains. If they're glued together in the right way, they
make up a train. What's the right kind of metaphysical glue for trains?
Well, it's being connected with those little locks.</p>

<p>That may or may not be the right way to think about what I've been
calling car stages or car slices. On some metaphysical views, you might
say, just exactly like with the train, the car stages are the
metaphysically fundamental things and a car, something extended through
time, is glued together like a sandwich from the car stages. And then,
we might worry about what's the relevant metaphysical glue for cars. On
other metaphysical views, no what's really prior is the car itself, and
talking about car stages is a certain convenience, a kind of way of
chopping up the fundamental thing, the car. So, to use an analogy that
I think David Kaplan, a philosopher at UCLA offers, it's as though you
have to think of it more like a bologna or salami that you can slice.
If--For certain purposes you can talk about slices, but the fundamental
thing's the salami. All right.</p>

<p>In thinking about cars, should we say that the fundamental thing is
the car stages and they get put together like a sandwich to make cars?
Or should we think that the fundamental thing is the car extended
through time and it can be sliced up to make car stages? For our
purposes, I think we won't have to go there. It doesn't really matter.
As long as we're comfortable talking about entire space-time worms, the
cars, and the slices or the stages. We don't have to ask which is
metaphysically prior. You should also notice that- I should also
mention that there are other metaphysical views about what goes on when
an object exists over time. I've been here helping myself to the
suggestion that we should think about extension over time analogously
to the way we think about extension over space. That's why I started
with a spatial example, the train, and moved to the temporal example,
the car. And there are those philosophers who think that's exactly the
right way to think about it and those philosophers that think no, no,
that's misleading. When an object is extended over time, really the
entire object's right there at every single moment. These are
interesting and difficult questions. But again, I think for our
purposes, we don't have to go there.</p>

<p>So I will help myself to this language of space-time worms, objects
that extend not only over space but also over time. And distinguish the
entire worm from the various slices or stages that either make up the
worm or that we could slice the worm into. The point that I've been
emphasizing is, well first point, of course, has been, "Don't confuse
the stages with the entire space-time worm." The stages can differ
without the entire space-time worm being a different worm. Second
question I've hinted at that we're about to turn to, not literally turn
to at the moment, but shortly we'll turn to is, "What's the relevant
glue?" What makes two stages, stages of the very same thing? In the
case of trains, as I say, it's fairly obvious. What is it in the case
of cars? What makes the 1990 car stage a stage in the very same car,
the extended through space and time worm car, as the 2006 stage? What's
the metaphysical glue that glues these stages together? And the answer,
not that there aren't puzzles about it, but the answer is roughly,
"It's the very same car if it's the very same hunk of metal and plastic
and wires."</p>

<p>There was the car. A car is just some metal and plastic, rubber. And
that very same hunk continued into 2000 and it continued into 2006. The
glue, the key to identity across time for cars, is being the same hunk
of stuff. Now, that doesn't mean it's got to be the same atom for atom.
We know that's not true. Look, think about my steering wheel. Every
time I grabbed the steering wheel to drive, I wore away thousands of
atoms. You can lose some atoms and still be the very same steering
wheel. Every now and then, I'd replace the tires on my car. But for all
that, it was the same hunk of stuff.</p>

<p>Now this raises an interesting issue. How many changes of the
constituent parts can you have and still be the same hunk of stuff? If
this was a class in which we were going to worry about the general
problem of identity across time, this would be a problem we'd have to
directly face. But since we are only looking at enough of the problem
of identity to get to the question that we really want to think about,
the nature of personal identity across time, I'm not going to pursue
that. I just want to flag the thought that you can be the very same
hunk of stuff, even if some of the constituent atoms have changed along
the way. And even bigger parts. You can replace the headlights and
still be the same hunk of stuff. At any rate, that's what's gone on in
the car case, same hunk of stuff 1900-2006. And when I see the car on
the junk dealer's yard in 2010 and ask, "Is that my car or not?" the
answer lies in--if only we could know--is that the same hunk of stuff
or not? That's what the key, the metaphysical glue is, being the same
hunk of stuff.</p>

<p>All right, let's turn now to the case we really wonder about,
personal identity. Here's somebody lecturing to you in 2007, Shelly
Kagan. We imagine there's somebody in 2050 and we ask, "Is that Shelly
Kagan?" We'll call him "Mr. X." [See Figure 10.9] We ask, "Is that the
same person or not?" Now again, at this point you're not going to be
tempted by the mistake. I'm not asking, "Is this person stage Mr. X the
same person stage as SK 2007?" Obviously not. SK 2007 has still got his
hair, has the beard, stands up more or less straight. Mr. X is bald,
doesn't have a beard. I suppose I should have drawn him bent. Can I do
that? A little cane. I'm not asking, "Is the person stage Mr. X the
same as the person stage SK 2007?" Sounds like a computer or something.
Get the SK 2007! I'm not asking that. I'm asking, I'm saying, "Look,
when you look at the current stage, the current person slice and think
about the entire extended-through-time entity, the person that makes up
Shelly Kagan, or that is Shelly Kagan, is that the very same person as
the extended-through-time person that you got in mind when you point to
the Mr. X 2050?"</p>

<p>The stages are obviously different. But by looking at the stages, we
pick out a space-time worm that makes up a person. And we're asking,
"Is that the very same space-time worm as the one we picked out
previously or a different space-time worm than the one we picked out
previously?" And the answer, presumably, is going to be, "Well it
depends on getting clear on whether the stages are glued together in
the right metaphysical way." And so, what we'd like to know is, well,
what does it take for two person stages to make up or be part of the
very same extended-through-time person? What's the metaphysical glue
that underlies being a single extended-through-time person? What's the
key to personal identity? If we could get clear about what the answer
to that metaphysical question, the key to personal identity, we'd at
least know what we needed to find out to answer the question, "Is this
one person or two?" Are the pieces glued together in the right way?</p>

<p>Different question, the question that we're ultimately hoping to get
an answer to. Could I survive my death? Well look, think again about
the question we started with. Could I survive the weekend? To survive
the weekend, there's got to be somebody who's alive, some person on
Tuesday and that person's got to be the very same person as the person
you're looking at now, you're thinking about now. Or to put it in terms
of stages, that person's got to be--that stage, that slice has to be
part of the very same extended-through-time space-time worm as this
stage is. They've got to be glued together in the right way. We can't
tell whether that's true until we know what the glue is. But at least
we anticipate that, well, there will be somebody here on Tuesday who is
glued together in that way, the right way, whatever that turns out to
be. The stages will be glued together in the right way.</p>

<p>Suppose I asked then, "Will I survive my death?" All right, so I'm
going to be optimistic. I'm going to assume that I make it to 2040.
2040… I won't even be 90 yet. That's not too wildly optimistic. It's
optimistic, but not wildly optimistic. So here's the SK 2040. We know
that there's an extended through space and time, space-time worm, a
person. Then let's suppose, sadly, 2041 my body dies. And I ask, "Could
I survive my death, that is to say, the death of my body?" Well, we
want to know, after 2041, let's say 2045, is there somebody who's a
person, call him Mr. X. Could it be the case that there'd be a person
in 2045, after the death of my body in 2041, could it be the case that
there's a person who is part of the very same space-time worm that
you're thinking about right now? Could that be or not? [See Figure
10.10] We can't answer that question until we are clearer about what
does it take to have identity across time. What's the key to personal
identity? What's the metaphysical glue? Once we get clear about what
the relevant metaphysical glue is, we'll be in a position to start
asking, "Could this happen or not?"</p>

<p>All right, that's the question I want to turn to, then. What are the
possible positions on this question? What's the key to personal
identity? What's it to be the very same person? As we might put it
somewhat misleadingly, what is it for "two" people to really be the
same single extended-through-time person?</p>

<p>Suppose we believed in souls. Then here would be a natural proposal.
The metaphysical key to personal identity is having the very same soul.
So suppose I was a dualist. I'd say, "Look, you're looking at a body,
but connected in this intimate way with this body is a particular soul,
the soul of Shelly Kagan. What makes it true that the person lecturing
to you next Tuesday is Shelly Kagan, the very same person, what makes
that true is that it's the very same soul. As long as this soul is here
again on Tuesday, It'll be Shelly Kagan. If it's a different soul, it's
not Shelly Kagan." That's the natural thing to suggest if we believe in
the soul view. The key to personal identity--not the only thing a soul
theorist can say, but the natural thing for a soul theorist to say--the
key to personal identity is having the very same soul. Same soul, same
person. Different soul, different person.</p>

<p>Imagine that God or a demon or what have you, for whatever perverse
reason, severs the ordinary connection between my body and my soul and
then reconnects the wires, as it were, so that there's a different soul
animating and controlling this body on Tuesday. For whatever perverse
reasons, maybe to make some sort of philosophical point, that person
decides to come in anyway on Tuesday and lecture to you about
philosophy. According to the view that we're taking, which we'll now
call the soul view, according to the soul view, it won't be me
lecturing to you on Tuesday. Why not? Because we've just stipulated
it's not the same soul. It's a different soul. The key to personal
identity, according to the soul theory of personal identity, the key to
personal identity is having the same soul.</p>

<p>When I ask myself, "Will I survive the weekend?" what I'm asking is,
"Will my soul still be around come Tuesday?" As long as my soul still
exists and is functioning, it's still me. I'm still around. In
fact--peeking ahead of course, and this is why we are often drawn to
soul views--even if my body dies, as long as my soul continues to
exist, I continue to exist. The key to personal identity, according to
the soul view, is having the same soul. As long as my soul continues to
exist, it's still me, whether or not my body's still alive. And it's
precisely for this reason that at least the soul, belief in the soul,
combined with the soul theory of personal identity, holds out the
possibility of surviving my death. We may not know that the soul will
continue to exist after the destruction of the body, but at least it
seems like a possibility. Plato of course, as we know, tried to argue
that we could know, that there was--there were good grounds for
believing the soul would continue to exist. I've said I don't find
those grounds so convincing. But even if we didn't think we could show
that the soul would continue to exist, at least it <i>could</i>, it
would make perfect sense to think about it continuing to exist. And so
I could survive the death of my body.</p>

<p>In contrast, it looks--Prospects don't look so promising for
surviving my death of my body if we don't believe in dualism, if we're
physicalists. If a person's just a P-functioning body, how could it be
that after the death of his body he's still around? Well, we'll say
more about that a little bit later.</p>

<p>Come back to the soul view. It's me as long as it's the same soul.
It's not me if it's a different soul. Now consider the following
possibility. Suppose that over the weekend, at 3:00 a.m., Saturday
night, Sunday morning, while I'm asleep, God replaces my soul with a
different soul, hooks it up to the body, gives that soul, that
replacement soul, all of my memories, all of my beliefs, all of my
desires, all of my intentions. Somebody wakes up Sunday morning and
says, "Hey, it's a great day. Wonderful to be alive. I'm Shelly Kagan.
Got to get to work." Whatever it is. Says "I'm Shelly Kagan"; but he's
not. According to the soul view, he's not. Because according to the
soul theory of personal identity, to be me that person's got to have my
soul. And in this story, he doesn't have my soul. My soul got
destroyed, let's suppose, 3:00 a.m. Sunday morning. A new soul got
created. It's not me. There's a person there, all right. It's a person
that doesn't have a very long history. Maybe he'll go on to have a long
history. But it's a different extended through space and time person
than the one you're thinking about right now. Because, according to the
soul view, to be me it's got to have the same soul and we just
stipulated, not the same soul.</p>

<p>Think about what that means. If God were to replace my soul Saturday
night, I die. And the thing that wakes up Sunday isn't me. Of course,
he'd think he was me. He'd think to himself, "I'm the very same person
who was lecturing about philosophy last week." But he'd be wrong. It
isn't the same person, because it's not the same soul. He'd be wrong
and--notice this--there'd be no way at all he could tell. He could
check his beliefs. He can check his desires. He can check his memories.
But that's not the key to personal identity, according to the soul
view. The key to personal identity, according to the soul view, is
having the very same soul. You can't check that. You can't see the soul
to see if it's the same one. So if this were to happen to him, he
wouldn't be Shelly Kagan, the person who'd been lecturing last week.
But there'd be no way at all he could know that.</p>

<p>And now the question you would need to ask yourself is, how do you
know this didn't happen to you last night? You woke up this morning
thinking, I'm the very same person--Joe, Linda, Sally, whatever it
is--the very same person who was in class yesterday. How do you know?
How could you possibly know? If God replaced your soul with a new one,
destroyed the old one, gave the new one all the old memories, beliefs,
desires, goals, and so forth, that person who was in class last week,
yesterday, died. The person who's here now hasn't been around 10 years,
20 years, what have you. You were born a few hours ago. And there'd be
no way at all that you could possibly tell.</p>

<p>How do you know, not only that it didn't happen to you last night,
how do you know something like this doesn't happen every single night,
every hour on the hour, every minute, every second? God whips out the
old soul, destroys it, puts in a new one with--Maybe souls only last
for a minute and a half. If that was happening, then people don't last
very long. Bodies may last 20 years, 50 years, 80 years, 100 years, but
people would only last an hour or, if it's every minute substitution, a
minute. And you'd never possibly be able to tell.</p>

<p>Now these worries were raised by John Locke, the great British
philosopher, and he thought, this is too big a pill to swallow. This is
too big a bullet to bite. We can't take seriously the suggestion that
there's no way at all to tell whether it was still me from the one day
to the next, from one hour to the next, from one minute to the next,
just not plausible. It's not that there's anything incoherent about
this view. It doesn't say anything logically contradictory about this
view. You just have to ask yourself, "Could this really be what
personal identity is all about? That there'd be no way at all to tell
whether I've survived from one minute to the next, from one hour to the
next?" Locke thought no, you couldn't possibly take this view seriously
if you thought about what it meant.</p>

<p>Notice, this is not an argument that souls don't exist. If you find
this argument convincing, what it's an argument for is the claim that
even if souls do exist, they may not be the key to personal identity.
And so what we have to ask ourselves is, what's the alternative? What
better suggestion is there for what we could point to as the
metaphysical glue, the key to personal identity? And that's the
question that we'll take up next time.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
