
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 11 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">February 20, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Last time, we turned to the question
of what the metaphysical key to personal identity might be. What makes
it be the case that one person, some person that exists in the future,
is the same person as me. The first approach to this that we considered
was the soul theory of personal identity: the key to being the same
person is having the same soul. Same soul, same person. Different soul,
different person. And the difficulty with that approach, even if we
bracket the question whether or not there are souls, the difficulty
with that approach was that it seems as though the soul could
constantly be changing while the personality, as we might call it,
stays the same. I have the same beliefs, memories, desires, goals,
preferences and so forth. But the soul underneath it all keeps being
swapped every five minutes. If the soul theory of personal identity
were right, that would not be me. I would be--Every five minutes that
person would die and we'd have a new person, despite having the same
personality.</p>

<p>Most of us find that a rather difficult thing to believe, that the
person could be constantly changing in this way, without having any way
at all to tell. And if we're not willing to accept that implication, it
seems as though we need to reject "the soul theory of personal
identity." Now, I use this cumbersome phrase because, of course, I'm
not here talking about rejecting the existence of souls. What I'm
considering right now is the question whether sameness of soul is the
key to being the same person. And this is a--There's a logical
distinction here that's worth drawing. Even if you believe in souls,
you don't have to say that having the very same soul is the key to
being the very same person. And trivially, of course, if you don't
believe in souls, if you don't believe that souls exist, that you
certainly can't appeal to the existence of souls, the continuity of
soul, the sameness of soul, as the key to personal identity.</p>

<p>But we might then ask, "Well what's the alternative?" Now, the
natural alternative is to say, "The key to being the same person is not
the sameness of the soul, whether or not it exists, but rather having
the very same body." And again, although I'm not going to go on and on
about this point, it's worth noticing that even if you do believe that
souls exist, nothing stops you from accepting the body theory of
personal identity. Nothing rules out the possibility that having the
very same body is the key to being the very same person over time. Even
if you believe in souls, you can accept the body theory. And it
certainly looks as though if you don't believe in souls, you have to
accept the body theory of personal identity. Now, as it turns out, that
appearance is deceptive. There are still other alternatives open to the
physicalist, but let's come to that other alternative later.</p>

<p>Let's take a few minutes and consider the nature of the body theory,
the body theory of personal identity. On this theory, of course, the
secret to being the same person is having the same body. So when we
ask, well you remember last lecture I was talking about how there'd be
somebody here lecturing to you, philosophy, on Tuesday. Well, here
somebody is. Is that the same person? Is the person who's lecturing to
you now the same person as the person who was lecturing to you before?
According to the body theory, the answer is--turns on the question,
"Well, is this the same body as the lump of flesh and bone that was
here last week?" If it is--and by the by it is--if it is, then it's the
same person. So am I the person who was lecturing to you last week?
Yes, I am, because it's the very same body. That's what the body theory
says.</p>

<p>And unlike souls, where it's all rather mysterious how you could
tell whether soul swapping was taking place or not, it's not all that
mysterious how we check out to see whether the same body's been around.
Even though you didn't do it, you could have snuck into my house,
watched my body go to sleep, get up in the morning, followed the body
around over the course of the day, see it go to sleep again. You could
have tracked that body through space and time and said, "Hey look. It's
the very same body." In the same way that we are able to track in
principle cars, our earlier example, and talk about yeah, it's the same
hunk of metal and wire and rubber and plastic. This is the same hunk,
same body. All right, same body, same person. That's the body theory of
personal identity.</p>

<p>Now, if we accept the body theory, then of course if we turn to the
question, "Could I survive my death?" Could I survive the death of my
body?" at first glance, it looks as though the answer's going to have
to be, "Well, of course not." Because when my body dies, then, oh
eventually the body begins to decay. It decomposes, turns into
molecules which get absorbed into the soil or what have you. This may
take years or decades or even centuries, but my body no longer exists
after death of my body. And so how could I survive the death of my
body, if for me to survive the death of my body, there's got to be
somebody who's me, and if being me requires it being the same body, my
body would have to still be around, but it's not. That's what it looks
like at first glance.</p>

<p>But at second glance we see that there's at least a logical
possibility of surviving the death of my body. All it takes is for my
body to be put back together. Bodily resurrection. Now I'm not going to
here pursue the question of, "Do we believe bodily resurrection occurs
or will occur?" I'll note that there have been religious traditions
that have taught and believed in this possibility. In particular, it's
probably worth mentioning that early Christians believed in something
like the body theory of personal identity and believed in bodily
resurrection that would happen on Judgment Day. We can certainly
understand the possibility that God would perform a miracle, put the
molecules back together, turn the body back on. Same body, same person,
come Judgment Day. That's the possibility. So it's at least worth
emphasizing the fact that even if we don't believe in souls, we could
still believe in the possibility of surviving one's death, the death of
one's body, if we're willing to believe in bodily resurrection. Well,
that's how it looks.</p>

<p>Now let's take a harder look. Talking that way assumes that when you
put the body back together, when God puts the body back together on
Judgment Day, that that's still my body. Is that right? I'm inclined to
think it is right. If God gathers up all the various molecules that had
composed my body, reassembles them in the right order, putting this
calcium molecule next to that hydrogen molecule and so forth and so on,
reassembles them in the right way--obviously if what He makes out of my
body's molecules is a Cadillac, then that's not my body--but if He puts
them together in the right way, that seems like it should be my
body.</p>

<p>So here's an analogy to give you a sense of what's going on. Suppose
I take my watch to the jeweler because it stopped working. And in order
to clean it and fix it, repair it, what the jeweler does is he takes it
apart. He takes the rust off of the gears, if there are still gears in
watches. Imagine it's an old stop watch. And he cleans all the pieces
and buffs them and polishes them and then reassembles the whole thing.
And a week later, I come back and ask, "Where's my watch?" And he hands
it to me. Well, all well and good.</p>

<p>Now imagine some metaphysician saying, "Wait a minute, buster. Not
so quick. That's not my watch. Admittedly, it's composed of all the
very same pieces that made up my watch. Admittedly, all these pieces
are in the very same order as my watch, but still that's not my watch."
On the contrary, it seems to me the right thing to say about that
example is, "No, that is my watch." My watch was disassembled for a
period of time. Perhaps we should say my watch didn't exist during that
period of time. But it got put back together. Now that's my watch. If
that's the right thing to say about the watch--and it does seem to me
to be the right thing to say about the watch--then God could presumably
do the same thing on Judgment Day. He could take our molecules, which
had been scattered, put them back together and say, "Ha! That's your
body." And if the body theory of personal identity is right, well, that
would be me. So it seems to me.</p>

<p>But there's a different example that we have to worry about as well,
which argues against this proposal that the body could decompose and
then be recomposed. This is an example that's due to Peter van Inwagen.
He's a contemporary metaphysician, teaches at Notre Dame. Suppose that
my son builds a tower out of wooden blocks. We have a set of wooden
blocks at home. Suppose that he builds some elaborate tower. It's very
impressive. And he says, "Please show it to mom when she comes home."
And he goes to bed. And I'm very good. I'm cleaning up the house after
he goes to bed and oops, I knock over the tower. I say, "Oh my god,
he's going to be so angry. I promised him I'd be careful." So what I do
is I take the blocks and I put them back together, building a tower in
the very same shape and the very same structure, the very same order as
the tower that my son had built. And in fact I'm so careful--perhaps
the blocks are numbered--I'm so careful that every block is in exactly
the same position as in the case where my son built it.</p>

<p>All right, I rebuild or I build this tower and my wife comes home
and I say, "Look what our son built. This is the tower that our son
built." Ah, that doesn't sound right. That's not the tower that our son
built. That's a tower that I built. This is a duplicate tower. Sure, if
my son were to wake up and I didn't tell him, he wouldn't know that it
was a duplicate. But when you take a wooden block tower apart and then
put the pieces back together, piece for piece, duplicate, you don't
have the very same tower that you started out with. That's what van
Inwagen says and, I've got to admit, sounds right to me. If I were to
point to that tower and say, "Ari built that," I'd be saying something
false. "That's the very same tower that Ari built." No, I'd be saying
something false.</p>

<p>So van Inwagen concludes, if you have an object and you take it
apart and then put it all back together again, you don't have the very
same object that you started out with. So even if Judgment Day were to
come, and God were to reassemble the molecules and resurrect the body,
it's not the very same body that you started out with. And if having
the very same body is the key to personal identity, it's not the same
person. Come Judgment Day, we've got a duplicate of me, but we don't
have me. That's what van Inwagen would say, if that's the way bodily
resurrection would work.</p>

<p>I don't know, theology aside, I don't know what to say about the
metaphysical questions. When I think about the tower case, I do find
myself inclined to say, with van Inwagen, that's not the tower my son
built. But when I think about the watch case, I find myself saying that
is the very same watch. Now, all I can do is invite you to think about
these two cases and ask yourself, what should we say here? Of course,
for those people who think it really is the same tower, no problem.
Then we say, the watch and the tower, in both cases, it's the very same
object when it's reassembled. Reassemble the body, that'll be the very
same body as well. For those people who say, "Yeah, van Inwagen was
right about the tower, and the same thing would be true about the
watch. The reassembled watch isn't the very same watch," then we have
to say bodily resurrection would <i>not</i> be the very same body. So
that wouldn't be me waking up on Judgment Day.</p>

<p>The alternative is to try to find some relevant difference between
the watch case and the tower case. Something that allows us to say that
"well, when you reassemble the watch it is the same watch. When you
reassemble the tower, it's not the same tower. Here's the explanation
of why those two things work differently in the reassembly cases." And
then of course, we'd have to further investigate whether when you
reassemble a body, is it more like the watch case or is it more like
the tower case?</p>

<p>I just have to confess, I don't know what the best thing to say
about these cases is. I find myself inclined to think reassembled
watch, same watch. Reassembled tower, not same tower. Maybe there's a
difference there. I don't have a good theory as to what the difference
is. Since I don't have a good theory as to what the difference is, I'm
not in a good position to decide whether a reassembled body would be
the same body or a different body. I don't know. So there's
metaphysical work to be done here by anybody who's at least interested
in getting this theory of identity worked out properly.</p>

<p>Still, at least the possibility that we could work this out is still
there. So I suppose there's still at least the possibility that bodily
resurrection would be coherent in such a way that it would still be the
same body. So if we accept the body theory, could there be life after
death? Could there be survival of the death of my body? Seems like, as
far as I can tell, it's still a possibility, although there's some
puzzles here that I don't know how to see my way through. Mind you,
that's not to say that I myself do believe that there will be a
Judgment Day, and on that day God will reassemble the bodies. But it at
least seems like a coherent possibility.</p>

<p>Let's refine the body view. I've been suggesting that the key here,
the idea of whether it's the same person or not, is whether it's the
same body. But of course as we know in thinking about familiar objects,
we don't need to have every single piece of an object, of an entity,
stay the same to have the same thing. So I think I previously talked
about the steering wheel in my car. Every time I drive the steering
wheel in my car, I rub off some atoms. But that's okay. It's still the
very same physical object. The steering wheel is--Having the same
steering wheel is compatible with changing of a few pieces. The same
thing is true for bodies, right? You get sunburned, your skin peels,
you've lost some atoms in your body. It doesn't really matter. It's
still the very same body. So if body is the key to personal identity,
we don't have to worry about the fact that we're constantly gaining and
losing atoms. Yes, question?</p>

<p><b>Student:</b> What about someone who loses a huge amount of
weight?</p>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Good. The question was, "What about
somebody who loses a huge amount of weight?" They feel different.
People treat them different. What about that case? Well, I think if
we're doing metaphysics, as opposed to psychology--Psychologically, we
understand why losing weight might make a real difference as to how you
feel about yourself. And we might even say, loosely, it's as though
she's a whole new person. But strictly speaking, we don't think it is
literally a whole new person. It's not as though we say, "Poor Linda
died when she entered the spa. Or a week into the spa when she dropped
those 50 pounds. Somebody else who remembers all of Linda's childhood,
some imitator came along." We don't say "different person." We say
"same person, lost a lot of weight."</p>

<p>Now that's not a problem for the body view, because on the body
view, the question is, is it the same body? And what we want to say is,
of course, look, just like it's still your body even if you break your
arm. Even though--It's still your body after you've eaten dinner, and
so now some molecules have been absorbed into your body that weren't
there before. It's still your body after you lose some molecules, even
a lot of molecules. There can be changes in your body that are
compatible with it still being the same body. Now, we might worry about
the--Which changes? Are all the changes, it's certainly not as though
any change will do. I mean, suppose what happens is Linda goes to bed
and what we do in the middle of the night is we take away that body and
put some new body there. Well that 100% change, that's clearly too
much. Change of some small percentage, from eating, not a problem.
Change from a somewhat larger percentage of losing a fair bit of weight
doesn't seem to be a problem.</p>

<p>So which changes in bodies make for a different body and which
changes in body make for the same body? And in particular, how should
we run that if we're thinking about the body as the key to personal
identity? I think if we have that question in front of our minds, we're
going to want to say not all parts of the body are equally important.
You lose a fair bit of weight, some fat from your gut, not a
problem.</p>

<p>Here's one of my favorite examples. In the Star Wars movies, Darth
Vader whips out his light saber and slashes off the hand of Luke
Skywalker. "Luke, I am your father." "No!" Then the hand goes, right?
The very next scene--this has always amazed me--the very next scene,
Luke's got an artificial hand that's been attached to his body and they
never even mention it again. No one says, "Oh, poor Luke. He died when
Darth Vader cut off the hand."</p>

<p>It seems pretty clear that not all parts of the body matter. You can
lose a hand and still survive. Same body, except now without a hand.
Suppose Darth Vader had aimed a little higher and cut off Luke's entire
arm. It would still be Luke. It would still be Luke's body. Suppose,
even worse, Darth Vader slices off both arms and both legs. It would
still be Luke. It would still be Luke's body, though now without arms
and legs.</p>

<p>What part of the body, if any, is essential? Well here's a proposal.
It seems to me we'd say something rather different if what happened was
that what got destroyed was Luke's brain. Suppose that Darth Vader uses
the force--the dark side of the force of course--Darth Vader uses the
dark side of the force to destroy, to turn into pea soup, Luke
Skywalker's brain. Now I think we might want to say, "Well look, no
more Luke." And if what happens is they drag out some replacement
brain, it's still not Luke.</p>

<p>At least, that's a possible version of the body view. According to
this version, which I take to be the most promising, the best version
of the body view, the crucial question in thinking about personal
identity is whether it's the same body--but not all parts of the body
matter equally. The most important part of the body is the brain. Well,
why the brain? No surprise there, because of course the brain is the
part, we now know, the brain is the part of the body that is the house
of your personality, your beliefs, your desires, your fears, your
ambitions, your goals, your memories. That's all housed in the brain.
And so that's the part of the brain that's the key part of the body for
the purpose of personal identity.</p>

<p>That's what I'm inclined to think is the best version of the body
view. We find examples of this thought, that the brain is the key, in
odd places. So let me actually share one with you. This was something
from the Internet that my brother sent to me some years ago. It
purports to be from a transcript from an actual trial in which a
lawyer's cross examining the doctor. And you'll see. I don't actually
know whether it's true or not, whether it's just somebody made it up.
But it purports to be true.</p>

<blockquote><b>Q:</b> Doctor, before you performed the autopsy, did you
check for a pulse?<br />
 <b>A:</b> No.<br />
 <b>Q:</b> Did you check for blood pressure?<br />
 <b>A:</b> No.<br />
 <b>Q:</b> Did you check for breathing?<br />
 <b>A:</b> No.<br />
 <b>Q:</b> So then it is possible that the patient was alive when you
began the autopsy?<br />
 <b>A:</b> No.<br />
 <b>Q:</b> How can you be so sure, doctor?<br />
 <b>A:</b> Because his brain was sitting on my desk in a jar.<br />
 <b>Q:</b> But could the patient have still been alive
nevertheless?<br />
 <b>A:</b> It is possible that he could have been alive and practicing
law somewhere.</blockquote>

<br />
<br />
<p>The point--The reason that this is funny, other than of course the
obvious moral, which is that lawyers are morons, is that of course. Why
is it so clear the lawyer's got to be a moron? Because of course we
think, look, lose a hand, the guy could still be alive. Lose an arm,
lose a leg. Lose the <i>brain</i>, he's not alive. So again this is,
this is hardly philosophical proof, but it shows that we're drawn to
the thought that the key part of the body is the brain.</p>

<p>Now, think about what the implication of holding that view. Suppose
we adopt that version of the body view. If I get a liver transplant, so
here I am and we take out my liver and we put Jones' liver inside. I've
gotten a liver transplant. It's still me. Suppose we rip out my heart
and put Jones' heart in here. I've gotten a heart transplant. It's
still me. Suppose we rip out my lungs and put in Jones' lungs. I've
gotten a lung transplant. It's still me. Suppose we rip out my brain,
put in Jones' brain. Have I gotten a brain transplant? No. What's
happened is that <i>Jones</i> has gotten a <i>body</i> transplant. Or,
as we might put it, a torso transplant. If we accept this version of
the body theory, we say the crucial part of the body for personal
identity is not sameness of torso. The crucial part of the body is
sameness of brain. Just like "follow the soul" was the answer if we
believe in the soul theory of personal identity, if we believe in the
brain version of the body theory of personal identity, same person or
not? Follow the brain. Same brain, same person. Different brain,
different person.</p>

<p>As I've now been saying several times, I think that's the best
version of the body view, although not all body theorists believe that.
As you know from reading your Perry, the assigned reading, his
<i>Dialogue on Personal Identity and Immortality</i>, the heroine of
that story, Gertrude--Gertrude actually thinks the key part of the body
is the torso. Follow the torso, follow the person. That's what she
thinks. I'm inclined to say, no. In those moods, when I accept the body
theory, I'm inclined to think, no, follow the brain. Gertrude would
presumably say you get a brain transplant, you got a brain transplant,
because it's the same torso. I want to say, as a fan of the brain
theory, you get a brain transplant, what's really happened is somebody
else has gotten a torso transplant. Follow the brain.</p>

<p>How much of the brain? Do we need all of the brain? Well, just like
we didn't have to follow the parts of the body that aren't essential
for housing the personality, we might ask ourselves, "Do we need all of
the brain to house the personality?"</p>

<p>Research suggests that there's a fair bit of redundancy in the
brain. You can lose portions of the brain and still have a perfectly
functioning, P-functioning person. Some of you may know that there have
been experiments in which, for one reason or the other, the two halves
of the brain have been separated. And you often end up there with,
well, something closer to two persons being housed within one skull,
because they can often still communicate in various ways. We don't
quite get that. I gather that the best research suggests we don't
really have complete redundancy with hemispheres.</p>

<p>But suppose that we did. Let's be science-fictiony. Suppose that, as
a kind of backup security, what evolution has done is produced so much
redundancy in the brain that either half of the brain would suffice.
All right, so think about our brain transplant example. So there's an
accident with Jones and Smith. Jones' torso gets destroyed. His brain
is fine. Smith's brain has gotten destroyed. His torso is fine. We take
Jones' brain; we put it in Smith's torso. We hook up all the wires, as
it were. The thing wakes up. Who is that? Jones' brain, Smith's torso.
Follow the brain. That's Jones that woke up.</p>

<p>Version two. Horrible accident. Jones' torso has been destroyed and
the left half of his brain has been destroyed. But the right half of
his brain is still there. Smith's torso is fine, but his entire brain
has been destroyed. We take the right half of Jones' brain, put it into
Smith's torso, hook up all the wires the right way, the thing wakes up.
Who is it? It's Jones. Follow the brain, and more particularly, follow
however much of the brain it takes to have enough of the brain there to
still give you the memories, beliefs, desires, and so forth and so on.
If it were true--it probably isn't true, but if it were true--that half
of the brain was enough, then half the brain would be enough. That
would be Jones that woke up. Question?</p>

<p><b>Student:</b> [inaudible]</p>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Great. The question was, "On this
theory, what do we say about the case where we take the two halves of
Jones' brain, split them, put them in two different torsos. They both
wake up. Would they both be Jones?" That's a wonderful question. It's a
wonderful case to think about and, indeed, I am going to come back to
it. But I just want to bracket it for the time being. But it's a great
question to keep in mind as you think about the plausibility of the
body theory.</p>

<p>All right, so I'm inclined to think that the best version of the
body theory has to do with following the brain. So one thing that a
physicalist, who does not believe in souls, one thing that a
physicalist could say is, "What's the key to personal identity? The
body. Sameness of body." And then I'm inclined to think the best
version of the body view is the brain view. So that's something that a
physicalist can say. And for that matter, it's something that a soul,
somebody who believes in souls, could say as well: even though there
are souls, that may not be the key to personal identity. Maybe sameness
of body is the key to personal identity.</p>

<p>That's something a physicalist or dualist <i>can</i> say. But, and
this is not--to make good on a promissory note I offered earlier, it's
not the only view available to physicalists or, for that matter,
dualists. Even if there are no souls, we don't have to say that the key
to personal identity is the sameness of the body. We could instead say
the key to personal identity is the sameness of the personality.</p>

<p>After all, go back to the Lockean worries about the soul theory of
personal identity. It seemed very hard to believe that it isn't the
same person when the memories and beliefs and desires and goals and
ambitions and fears are all the same, even if a soul is constantly
changing. It seems as though we wanted to say same person. Why? Roughly
speaking, because it's the same personality. And with the body view,
when I started arguing a few moments ago that the best version of the
body view was the brain view, why did that seem plausible? Why didn't
we say that Luke died when he lost his wrist? Because the brain, after
all, was the part of the body that houses the personality. Enough of
the brain was good enough, I said. What counts as good enough? Enough
to keep the personality.</p>

<p>Well, if what we think is really important here is the personality,
why don't we just say the key to personal identity is the personality?
Let's just say it's me, provided that there's somebody who's got the
same set of beliefs, desires, goals, memories, ambitions, fears. To
coin a word, the same "personality." So the secret to personal identity
on this new proposal isn't sameness of body, it's sameness of
personality.</p>

<p>Now, it's important to bear in mind that this view is perfectly
compatible with being a physicalist. After all, we're not saying that
in order to have personalities you need to have something nonphysical.
As physicalists, we can still say that the basis of personality is that
there are bodies that are functioning in certain ways. But for all
that, the key to the same person could have to do with the personality
rather than the sameness of bodies. Of course, normally the way you get
the same personality is by having the same body. Still, if we ask,
"What's doing the metaphysical work here? What's the key to being the
same person?" we can say sameness of body gave us the same personality,
but it was sameness of personality that made it be the very same
person.</p>

<p>Could there be some way to get sameness of personality while not
having sameness of body? Maybe. Suppose that we had some disease. The
doctor tells me the horrible news that I'm going to have some disease
that's going to eventually turn my brain into pea soup. But luckily,
just before it does it, they can take all of my personality and put it
into an artificial replacement brain. So there'll be --just like you
can have artificial hearts, artificial livers, you can have artificial
brains, which will get imprinted with the same personality. Same
memory, same beliefs, same desires, same fears, same goals. We
obviously can't do that. This is a science fiction story. But at least
it allows you to see how the body and the personality could come apart.
And so we could have same personality without literally the same brain.
If personality is the key to personal identity, that would still be me.
Hold off again for a few minutes, at least, on the question, "So what
should we believe here, the body, the personality view?" Let's try to
refine the personality theory.</p>

<p>So again, the point I was just emphasizing was even if we accept the
personality theory, this doesn't threaten our being physicalists. We
can still say the reason that we've got the same personality in the
normal case, is there's some physical explanation of what houses the
personality. But for all that, the key to personal identity is same
personality. Notice, by the way, that somebody who believes in souls
could also accept the personality theory of personal identity. Locke
believed in souls. He just didn't think they were the key to personal
identity. So you might think, "Oh no. The physicalist is wrong when the
physicalist says that personality--memory, belief, consciousness, what
have you--is housed or based in the body. It's based in an immaterial
soul." Dualists could say that. And yet, for all that, the dualist
could consistently say, "Still, same soul is not the key to personal
identity. Same personality is the key to personal identity. If God
replaces my soul every 10 minutes, as long as He does it in such a way
as to imprint the very same personality on the soul, it doesn't matter
any more than it didn't matter whether or not some of my body parts
were changing." So the personality theory of personal identity can be
accepted by physicalists and it can be accepted by dualists.</p>

<p>So, just to keep score, right now we've got three basic theories of
personal identity on the table. The soul theory, the key to personal
identity is the same soul. The body theory, the key to personal
identity is the same body. Where the best version, I think, is the
brain version of the body theory. And the personality theory, the key
to personal identity is having the very same personality.</p>

<p>Well again, we've got to be careful about refining this. Just like
we all agreed, I suppose, that you can have the very same body, even
though some of the parts come and go, atoms get added, other atoms get
knocked off. We can say, we'd better say, that you can have the very
same personality even if some of the elements in your personality
change.</p>

<p>After all, we defined the personality in terms of it being a set of
beliefs and memories and desires and goals and fears and so forth. But
those things are constantly changing. I have all sorts of memories now
that I didn't have when I was 10. I have memories of getting married,
for example. I wasn't married when I was 10. So does the personality
theorist have to say, "Uh-oh, different personality. That kid no longer
exists. That person died, got married and the memories died." If we say
that, we have very, very short lives. Because after all, right now I've
got some memories that I didn't have two hours ago. I have some
memories I didn't have 20 minutes ago. If every time you got a new
memory you had a new personality and the personality theory said having
the very same personality was the key to survival, then none of us
survive more than a few seconds.</p>

<p>Well, the answer presumably is going to be that the best version of
the personality theory doesn't require item for item having the very
same beliefs, memories, desires, and so forth. But instead requires
enough gradual overlap.</p>

<p>Your personality can change and evolve over time. So here I am as a
10 year old child. I've got certain desires, certain memories. As the
year goes by, I get some new memories. I lose some of my goals. I no
longer--When I was 10, when I grew up I wanted to be a trash collector.
That was my first chosen profession. At some point I gave up that
desire. I didn't want to be a trash collector anymore. I wanted to be,
I kid you not, I wanted to be a logician when I was a teenager. I
wanted to study symbolic logic. So at a certain point I gave that up.
So my memories, my desires were changing, but they all changed
gradually. I lost some old memories. I don't remember everything I knew
or remembered when I was 10. When I was 10, I had pretty vivid memories
of kindergarten. Now I have very sketchy memories of kindergarten.
Still, it wasn't abrupt. It was gradual. There was this slow evolution
of the personality. And so when the personality theorist says the key
to personal identity is the same personality, they don't' mean
literally the very same set of beliefs and desires. They mean, rather,
the same slowly evolving personality.</p>

<p>Here's an analogy. Suppose I had a rope that stretched from that end
of the room all the way across to this end of the room. Very same rope
at that end as this end. What makes up a rope? Well as you know, ropes
are basically bundles of fibers, very thin fibers that have been woven
together in a certain way. But the interesting thing is the fibers
themselves aren't actually all that long. They might be a couple of
inches or at most a foot or so. And so no single fiber stretches all
the way across the room. Or even if some fibers did, most of the fibers
don't. Does that force us to say, "Ah, so it's not the very same rope
at the end as at the beginning"? No. We don't have to say that at all.
What we want to say is, "It's the same rope as long as there's this
pattern of overlapping fibers." Certain fibers end, but most of the
fibers are continuing. Some new fibers get introduced. They continue
for a while. Eventually maybe those fibers end, but some new fibers
have been introduced in the meantime. As long as it's not abrupt.
Imagine I take my scissors and cut out a foot in the middle. Then we'd
say there isn't the right kind of pattern of overlap and continuity.
Now we really do have two ropes--one rope here, one rope there. But if,
in contrast, there is the right kind of pattern of overlap and
continuity, same rope, even though, even if no single fiber makes it
all the way across.</p>

<p>Something analogous needs to be said by the personality theorist.
Even if I have few or no memories identical to the ones that I had when
I was 10, that's okay. We can still say it's the same personality, the
same evolving personality, so long as there's a pattern of overlap and
continuity. New memories get added, some memories get lost. New goals
get added, some goals get lost. New beliefs get added, some beliefs get
lost. There might be few beliefs, desires, goals that made it all the
way through. But as long as there's the right kind of overlap and
continuity, same personality.</p>

<p>All right, so what have we got? Three views--soul view, body view,
personality view. Three rival theories about the key to personal
identity. Now, which of these is right? Well, I don't myself believe in
souls, it's hardly going to surprise you to learn that I don't think
the soul theory of personal identity is right. For me, the choice boils
down to the choice between the body theory of personal identity and the
personality theory of personal identity. Of course, in real life, they
go hand in hand. In ordinary cases at least, same body, same
personality. Both theories are going to say it's the very same person.
And if you believe in souls, you are likely to think, same soul as
well. In ordinary cases, you have the same soul, same body, same
personality, same person.</p>

<p>To think about which one of these is the key to personal identity,
we need to think about cases, maybe somewhat fantastical,
science-fictiony, in which they come apart. Cases in which bodies and
personalities go their own ways, as it were.</p>

<p>So that's what I'm going to do. I'm going to tell you a story in
which your body ends up one place and your personality ends up
someplace else. And I'm going to invite you to think about which of
these two resulting end products is me. If you could figure out which
one's you, that would tell you whether you think the body theory is the
right theory or the personality theory is the right theory.</p>

<p>Now, what's going to be our guide? I'm going to, rather
gruesomely--not in real life, a science fiction story--I'm going to
torture one of the two end products. I'm going to ask you, "Which one
do you want to be tortured?" Or to put the point more properly, which
one do you want to not be tortured? Because I'm going to assume, I'm
going to take it, that it's important to you that you not be tortured.
So by seeing who you want to keep safe, this will help you see which
one you think is you.</p>

<p>Of course, I've got to be sure that you're thinking about this in
the right way. Like some of you are probably good, moral individuals
and you don't want anybody to be tortured. I say, "Ah, I'm about to
torture Linda over there." You say, "No, no. Don't torture Linda."
Still, if I were to say to you, "I'm about to torture you." You'd say,
"No, no! Don't torture me!" and there'd be some extra little something
when you said that, right? So I want to invite you to keep that extra
little something in mind when we tell the stories, which we won't get
to until next time, when we tell the stories next time, and I say,
"Okay, who do you want to be tortured, this person or that person?" The
question is, from that special egoistic perspective that we're all
familiar with, which is the one you really care about? That's going to
be our guide to deciding what's the key to personal identity. But to
hear the stories, you've got to come back next lecture.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
