
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 15 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">March 6, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Last time we ended with the following
puzzle or question. If we say that to be a person is to be a
<i>P</i>-functioning body, it seems then as though we have to conclude
that when you're not <i>P</i>-functioning, you're dead. That is, you're
dead as a person. Previously, we distinguished between the death of my
body and my death as a person; let's focus on my death as a person. If
I'm not <i>P</i>-functioning, do we have to then say I'm dead?</p>

<p>Well, that may seem to be the most natural way to define death, but
it's not an acceptable approach. Because it would follow then, that
when I'm asleep, I'm dead. Well, not during those times, perhaps, when
I'm dreaming while I'm asleep. But think of the various periods during
the night in which you are in a deep, deep dreamless sleep. You're not
thinking. You're not planning. You're not communicating. Let's just
suppose, as seems likely, that none of the <i>P</i>-functioning is
occurring, at some point during sleep. Should we say then that you're
dead? Well, that's clearly not the right thing to say.</p>

<p>So we need to revise our account of what it is on the physicalist
picture to say that you're dead. What is it to be dead? It can't just
be a matter of not <i>P</i>-functioning. Well, one possibility would be
to say, the question is not whether you are <i>P</i>-functioning. It's
okay if you're not <i>P</i>-functioning, as long as your not
<i>P</i>-functioning is temporary. If you will <i>P</i>-function again,
if you have been <i>P</i>-functioning in the past and you will be
<i>P</i>-functioning again in the future, <i>P</i>-functioning for
person functioning, you will be <i>P</i>-functioning again in the
future, then you're not dead. Well, that's at least an improvement,
because then we say, look, while you're asleep, even though there's no
<i>P</i>-functioning going on, the lack of <i>P</i>-functioning is
temporary, so you're still alive.</p>

<p>But I think that won't quite do either. Let's suppose that come
Judgment Day, God will resurrect the dead. And let's just suppose the
correct theory of personal identity is such as to put aside any worries
we might have along with van Inwagen, that we discussed previously, as
to whether or not on resurrection day that would really be you or not.
Suppose it would be you. So God will resurrect the dead. Judgment Day
comes. The dead are resurrected. Well, now they're
<i>P</i>-functioning. So it turns out that during that period in which
they were dead, they were only temporarily not <i>P</i>-functioning.
But if death means permanent cessation of <i>P</i>-functioning, then it
turns out the dead weren't really dead after all. They were only
temporarily not <i>P</i>-functioning, just like we are temporarily not
<i>P</i>-functioning when we're asleep. Well, that doesn't seem right
either. On Judgment Day, God resurrects the <i>dead</i>. It's not that
He simply wakes up those in a deep, deep sleep. So the proposal that
death is a matter of permanent cessation of <i>P</i>-functioning versus
temporary, that doesn't seem like it's going to do the trick. But what
else do we have up our sleeves?</p>

<p>Here's a different proposal that I think is probably closer to the
right account. We might say, look, while you're asleep, it's true that
you're not <i>P</i>-functioning. For example, you're not doing your
multiplication tables. But although you are not engaged in
<i>P</i>-functioning, it does seem true to say that you still can
<i>P</i>-function. You still <i>could</i> do your multiplication
tables. Although it's not true that you are speaking French--let's
suppose that you know how to speak French--it's still true of you while
you're asleep that you can or could speak French. How do we know this?
Well, all we have to do is just wake you up. We wake you up and we say,
"Hey John, what's three times three?" And after you stop swearing at
us, you say, "Well, it's nine." Or we say, "Linda, hey, conjugate such
and such a verb in French." And you can conjugate it. Even though you
were not engaged in <i>P</i>-functioning while you were asleep, it's
still true that while you were asleep, you had the ability to engage in
<i>P</i>-functioning.</p>

<p>Abilities aren't always actualized. Your <i>P</i>-functioning is
actualized now, because you're engaged in thought, but you don't lose
the ability to think during those moments when you're not thinking.
Suppose we say then that to be alive as a person is to be able to
engage in <i>P</i>-functioning. And to be dead then, is to be unable to
engage in <i>P</i>-functioning. Why are you unable? Well, presumably
because whatever cognitive structures it takes in your brain to
underwrite the ability to <i>P</i>-function, those cognitive structures
have been broken, so they no longer work. It's--When you're dead, your
brain is broken. It's not just that you're not engaged in
<i>P</i>-functioning, you're no longer <i>able</i> to engage in
<i>P</i>-functioning.</p>

<p>That, at least, seems to handle the case of sleep properly. Although
you're not engaged in <i>P</i>-functioning, you're able to, so you're
still alive. Take the dead who will be resurrected on Judgment Day.
Although they will be engaged in <i>P</i>-functioning later on, it's
not true right now that they <i>can</i> engage in <i>P</i>-functioning.
Their bodies and brains are broken until God fixes them. So they're
dead.</p>

<p>All right, that seems to give the right answer and, in fact, it
gives us some guidance how to think about some other puzzling cases.
Take somebody who is in a coma, not engaged in <i>P</i>-functioning.
Their body, let's stipulate, is still alive. Their heart's still
beating, the lungs are still breathing and so forth. But we wonder, is
the person still alive? Does the person still exist? Well, they're not
engaged in <i>P</i>-functioning. That's pretty clear. We want to know,
<i>can</i> they engage in <i>P</i>-functioning?</p>

<p>Now, at this point we'd want to know more about the underlying
mechanics about what's gone on in the case of the coma. If the
following is the right description, then we perhaps should say they're
still alive. Look, when somebody's asleep, we need to do something to,
in effect, wake them up, something to turn the functioning back on. The
cognitive structures are still there, but the on-off switch is switched
to off. Perhaps that's what it's like when somebody's in a coma, or
perhaps at least certain types of comas. Of course, to turn the on-off
switch on is harder when somebody's in a coma. It's a bit more--to
continue with the metaphor of the on-of switch--as though not only is
the switch turned to off, there's a lock on the switch. And so we can't
turn the switch on in the normal way. Pushing the person in the coma
and saying, "Wake up, Jimmy" doesn't do the trick. But for all that,
although the on-off switch may be stuck in off, if the underlying
cognitive structures of the brain are such as to still make it true
that, flip the on switch back to on and the person can still engage in
cognitive <i>P</i>-functioning, maybe the right thing to say is the
person's still alive.</p>

<p>Coma case two. I'm not sure whether this really should be called a
coma. I don't know the biological and medical details. But imagine that
what's gone on is there's been decay of the brain structures that
underwrite the cognitive functioning. So now it's not just that the
on-off switch is stuck in off, the brain's no longer capable of
engaging in these higher order <i>P</i>-functions. This might be a
persistent vegetative state with no possibility of turning it on, even
in principle. Of such a person we might say, they're no longer capable
of <i>P</i>-functioning. And then perhaps the right thing to say is the
person no longer exists, so they no longer exist as a person, even if
the body is still alive. So far, so good.</p>

<p>Here's a harder case to think about. Suppose we put somebody in a
state of suspended animation, cool their body down so that the various
metabolic processes come to an end. They stop. As I'm sure you know,
we're able, with various lower organisms, to put them in a state of
suspended animation and then, the amazing thing is, if you heat them
back up again properly, they start functioning again. Now, we can't do
that yet with humans. But it doesn't jump out at us, at least, that
that should be an impossibility. So suppose we eventually learn how to
do this with humans. And now, suppose we take Larry and put him in a
state of suspended animation. Is he dead? Well, most of us don't feel
comfortable saying that he's dead. Just like we don't feel comfortable
saying that the--I suppose we could do this with a fruit fly. I don't
know whether we can or can't. Suppose we can. Suppose we do it with a
fruit fly. We don't feel comfortable saying the fruit fly's dead.
Rather, it's in a state of suspended animation. Well, similarly then,
perhaps we wouldn't want to say that Larry is dead. And the
"brokenness" account of death allows us to say Larry's not dead. The
structures in the brain which would underwrite the ability to engage in
<i>P</i>-functioning, they're not destroyed by suspended animation. So
perhaps in the relevant sense, the person can still engage in
<i>P</i>-functioning, so they're not dead. Good enough.</p>

<p>On the other hand, it doesn't seem so plausible, it doesn't seem
intuitively right, to say that they're alive. Is Larry alive when he's
in a state of suspended animation? No. It seems like he's not alive
either. Now that's a bit puzzling, right? It's as though we
need--Normally, we think that look, either you're alive or you're dead.
The two possibilities exhaust the possibilities. But thinking about
suspended animation suggests that we may actually need a third
category, suspended--neither alive nor dead.</p>

<p>Well, all right, if we do introduce a third possibility--I'm not
sure this is the right thing. It's not clear what's the right or best
thing to say about suspended animation. But at least that doesn't seem
like an unattractive possibility. If there are three
possibilities--dead, alive, or suspended--to be dead, we could still
say you've got to be broken, incapable of <i>P</i>-functioning.
Suspended isn't broken. It's just suspended. But then what do you need
to be alive? In addition to not being broken, what do you need to be
alive? Well, the initially tempting thing to say is not only aren't you
broken, but you're actually engaged in <i>P</i>-functioning. But if we
say that, then we're back to saying that somebody who's asleep isn't
really alive. That doesn't seem right either. So we need some account
to distinguish between suspended animation and out and out being alive.
And I'm not quite sure how to draw that line. So I'll leave that to you
as a puzzle to work on on your own.</p>

<p>That puzzle aside, it seems to me that once we become physicalists,
there's nothing especially deep or mysterious about death. The body is
able to function in a variety of ways. When some of those lower
biological functions are occurring, the body's alive. When all goes
well, the body is also capable of engaging in higher order personal
<i>P</i>-functioning. And then you've got a person. The body begins to
break, you get the loss of <i>P</i>-functioning. At that point, you no
longer exist as a person. When the body breaks some more, you get the
loss of biological or <i>B</i>-functioning, and then the body dies.
There's nothing especially mysterious about death, although there may
be a lot of details to work out from a scientific point of view. What
are the particular processes that underwrite biological functioning?
What are the particular processes that underwrite personality or person
functioning?</p>

<p>Still, there are a couple of claims about death that get made
frequently enough, about death being mysterious in one way or another,
that I want--or special or unique--that I want to focus on. In effect,
from the physicalist point of view, although death is unique because it
comes at the end of this lifetime of various sorts of functions,
there's nothing especially puzzling, nothing especially mysterious,
nothing especially unusual or hard to grasp about it. But there are a
handful of claims that people make about death suggesting that they
think, and they think we all think, that death is mysterious or unique
or hard to comprehend. I want to examine a couple of these.</p>

<p>One of them I'll get to later; if not later today, then next
lecture. Sometimes people say that we die <i>alone</i> or everybody
dies alone. And this is something--This is supposed to express some
deep insight into the nature and uniqueness of death. So although we're
able to eat meals together, we're able to go on vacations together and
take classes together, death is something we all have to do by
ourselves. That's the claim. We all die alone. That's a claim I'll come
back to.</p>

<p>What I want to look at first is the suggestion that somehow, at some
level, nobody really believes they're going to die at all. Now, having
distinguished between what we've called the death of the body and the
death of the person, the question whether or not you're going to die
needs to be distinguished. The question whether or not you believe
you're going to die needs to be distinguished. If somebody says, "You
know, nobody really believes they're going to die," they could mean one
of two things. They could mean nobody really believes they're going to
cease to exist as a person, first possibility. Second possible claim,
nobody really believes they're going to undergo the death of their
bodies. Let's take these in turn.</p>

<p>Is there any good reason to believe that we don't believe that we're
going to cease to exist as a person? Well, the most common argument for
this claim I think takes the following form. People sometimes say,
since it's impossible to picture being dead, it's impossible to picture
being dead--, That is to say, it's impossible to picture your own being
dead. Each one of us has to think about this from the first person
perspective or something like that. Think about your dying, your being
dead--Since that's impossible to picture, that's impossible to imagine,
nobody believes in the possibility that they're going to die, that
they're going to cease to exist.</p>

<p>The idea seems to be that you can't believe in possibilities that
you can't picture or imagine. Now, that hypothesis, that thesis, that
assumption, could be challenged. I think probably we shouldn't believe
the theory of belief which says that in order to believe in something,
you've got to be able to picture it or believe it. But let's grant that
assumption for the sake of argument. Let's suppose that in order to
believe in something, you've got to be able to picture it. What then?
How do we get from there to the conclusion that I can't believe that
I'm going to die, I'm going to cease to exist as a person? Well, the
thought, of course, is I can't picture or imagine my death. I can't
picture or imagine my being dead.</p>

<p>It's important here to draw some distinctions. I can certainly
picture being ill. There I am on my deathbed dying of cancer, growing
weaker and weaker. I can perhaps even picture the moment of my death.
I've said goodbye to my family and friends. I've the--Everything's
growing greyer and dimmer. It's growing harder and harder to
concentrate. And then, well, and then there is no "and more." The
claim, however, is not that I can't picture being ill or dying. The
claim's got to be, I can't picture <i>being</i> dead. Well, try it. Try
to picture being dead. What's it like to be dead?</p>

<p>Sometimes people claim it's a mystery. We don't know what it's like
to be dead, because every time we try to imagine it, we fail. We don't
do a very good job. I'm inclined to think that that way of thinking
about the question is really confused. You set yourself the goal of
trying to put yourself in the situation imaginatively of what it's like
to be dead. So I start by trying to strip off the parts of my conscious
life that I know I won't have when I'm dead. I won't hear anything. I
won't see anything. I won't think anything. And you try to imagine what
it's like to not think or feel or hear or see. And you don't do a very
good job of it. So you throw your hands up and you say, "Oh, I guess I
don't know what it's like." So it must be a mystery.</p>

<p>It's not a mystery at all. Suppose I ask, "What's it like to be this
cell phone?" The answer is, "It's not like anything," where that
doesn't mean there's something that it's like to be a cell phone, but
different from being anything else. So it's not like anything else;
it's a <i>special</i> way of feeling or experiencing. No. Cell phones
don't have any experience at all. There is <i>nothing</i> that it's
like on the inside to be a cell phone. Imagine that I try to ask
myself, "What's it like to be my ball point pen?" And I try to imagine,
well, first, imagine being really, really stiff, because you're not
flexible when you're a ball point pen. You can't move. And imagine
being really, really bored, because you don't have any thoughts or
interests. No. That's completely the wrong way to go about thinking
what it's like to be a ball point pen. There's <i>nothing</i> that it's
like to be a ball point pen. There's nothing to describe, nothing to
imagine. No mystery about what it's like to be a ball point pen. No
mystery about what it's like to be a cell phone.</p>

<p>Well, similarly then, I put it to you, there's no mystery about what
it's like to be dead. It isn't like anything. What I don't mean, "Oh,
it's like something, but different from everything else." I mean, there
is nothing there to describe. When you're dead, there's nothing
happening on the inside to be imagined. Well, should we conclude
therefore, given that we've got the premise, "If you can't picture it
or imagine it, then you can't believe in it," since I've just said,
look, you can't imagine being dead, but that's not due to any failure
of imagination, that's because there's nothing there to imagine or
picture. Still, granted the premise, if you can't picture it or imagine
it, you can't believe in it--Should we conclude, therefore, that you
can't believe you're going to be dead? No. We shouldn't conclude
that.</p>

<p>After all, not only is it true that you can't picture from the
inside what it's like to be dead, you can't picture from the inside
what it's like to be in dreamless <i>sleep</i>. There is nothing that
it's like to be in dreamless sleep. When you're in dreamless sleep,
you're not imagining or experiencing anything. Similarly, it's not
possible to picture or imagine what it's like to have fainted and be
completely unconscious with nothing happening cognitively. There's
nothing to picture or imagine. Well, should we conclude, therefore, so
nobody really believes that they're ever in dreamless sleep? Well, that
would be silly. Of course you believe that at times you're in dreamless
sleep. Should we say of somebody who's fainted or knows that they're
subject to fainting spells, they never actually believe that they pass
out? That would be silly. Of course, they believe they pass out.</p>

<p>From the mere fact that they can't picture it from the inside, it
doesn't follow that nobody believes they're ever in dreamless sleep.
From the mere fact that they can't picture from the inside what it's
like to have fainted and not yet woken up, it doesn't mean that nobody
believes that they ever faint. From the mere fact that you can't
picture from the inside what it's like to be dead, it doesn't follow
that nobody believes they're going to die.</p>

<p>But didn't I start off by saying I was going to grant the person who
is making this argument that in order to believe something, you've got
to be able to picture it? And haven't I just said, "Look, you can't
picture being dead"? So aren't I taking it back? Since I say you can
believe you're going to die, yet you can't picture it from the inside.
Haven't I taken back the assumption that in order to believe it, you've
got to be able to picture it? Not quite.</p>

<p>Although I am skeptical about that claim, I am going to continue
giving it to the person who makes this argument, because I'm not so
prepared to admit that you can't picture being dead. You can picture
being dead, all right. You just can't picture it from the inside. You
can picture it from the <i>outside</i>. I can picture being in
dreamless sleep quite easily. I'm doing it right now. I've got a little
mental image of my body lying in bed asleep, dreamlessly. I can picture
fainting, or having fainted, quite easily. Picture my body lying on the
ground unconscious. I can picture my being dead quite easily. It's a
little mental picture of my body in a coffin. No functioning occurring
in my body. So even if it were true that belief requires picturing, and
even if were true that you can't picture being dead from the inside, it
wouldn't follow that you can't believe you're going to die. All you
have to do is picture it from the outside. We're done. So I conclude,
of course you can and do believe you're going to die.</p>

<p>But at this point, the person making the argument has a possible
response. And it's a quite common response. He says, "Look, I try to
picture the world--admittedly from the outside--I try to picture the
world in which I don't exist, I'm no longer conscious. I'm no longer a
person, no longer experiencing anything. I try to picture that world. I
picture, for example, seeing my funeral. And yet, when I try to do
that, I'm observing it. I'm watching the funeral. I'm seeing the
funeral. Consequently, I'm thinking. So I haven't really imagined the
world in which I no longer exist, a world in which I'm dead, a world in
which I'm incapable of thought and observation. I've smuggled myself
back in as the observer of the funeral."</p>

<p>Every time I try to picture myself being dead, I smuggle myself back
in, conscious and existing as a person, hence, not dead as a person.
Maybe my body--I'm imagining my body dead, but I'm not imagining
myself, the person, dead. From which it follows, the argument goes,
that I don't really believe I'll ever be dead. Because when I try to
imagine a world in which I'm dead, I smuggle myself back in.</p>

<p>This argument shows up in various places. Let me mention, let me
quote one case of it, Freud. Freud says, this is, I'm quoting from one
of the Walter Kaufman essays that you'll be reading, called "Death." He
quotes Freud. Freud says,</p>

<blockquote>After all, one's own death is beyond imagining, and
whenever we try to imagine it we can see that we really survive as
spectators. Thus, the dictum could be dared in the psychoanalytic
school: at bottom, nobody believes in his own death. Or, and this is
the same: in his unconscious, every one of us is convinced of his
immortality.</blockquote>

<br />
<br />
<p>All right, there's Freud. Basically, just running the argument I've
just sketched for you. When you try to imagine your being dead, you
smuggle yourself back in as a spectator. And so, Freud concludes, at
some level none of us really believes we're going to die.</p>

<p>I want to say, I think that argument's a horrible argument. How many
of you believe that there are meetings that take place without you?
Suppose you're a member of some club and there's a meeting this
afternoon and you won't be there, because you've got to be someplace
else. So you ask yourself, "Do I believe that meeting's going to take
place without me?" At first glance, it looks like you do, but here's
the Freudian argument that shows you don't really. Try to imagine, try
to picture that meeting without you. Well, when you do picture it,
there's that room in your mind's eye. You've got a little picture of
people sitting around the table perhaps, discussing the business of
your club. Uh-oh, I've smuggled myself in as a spectator. If, like
you--, I think most of us picture these things up from a perspective in
a corner of the room, up on the wall, looking down, kind of a fly's
perspective. All right, I've smuggled myself in as a spectator. I'm
actually in the room after all. So I haven't really pictured the
meeting taking place without me. So I guess I don't really believe the
meeting's going to take place without me.</p>

<p>If Freud's argument for death, that is to say, none of us believe
we're going to die, was any good, the argument that none of us believe
meetings ever take place without us would have to work as well. But
that's silly. It's clear that we all do believe in the possibility,
indeed, more than a mere possibility, the actuality of meetings that
occur without us. Even though when I imagine that meeting, I'm in some
sense, smuggling myself in as an observer. From which I think it
follows that the mere fact that I've smuggled myself in as an observer
doesn't mean that I don't really believe in the possibility that I'm
observing in my mind's eye. I can believe in the existence of a meeting
that takes place, even though I smuggle myself in as an observer when I
picture that meeting. I can believe in the possibility of a world
without me, even though I smuggle myself in as an observer when I
picture that world without me.</p>

<p>Freud's mistake, and it's--although I'm picking on Freud, it's not
only Freud that runs this sort of argument. One comes across it
periodically. Within the last year, a member of our law school here put
forward this very argument and said he thought it was a good one. So
people think the argument's a good one. It strikes me as it's got to be
a bad one. The confusion, the mistake I think people are making when
they make this argument, the mistake I think they're making is this.
It's one thing to ask yourself, what's the content of the picture? It's
another thing to ask, when you look at the picture, are you existing?
Are you looking at the picture from a certain point of view?</p>

<p>Suppose I hold up a photograph of a beach with nobody on it. All
right, am I in that beach, as pictured in that photograph? Of course
not. But as I look at it, whether in reality or in my mind's eye, I'm
looking at it from a perspective. As I think about it, I'm viewing the
beach from a point of view which may well be on the beach, if somebody
draws a painting of a beach. But for all that, that doesn't mean that
within the picture of the beach, I'm in the beach. Looking at a picture
doesn't mean you're <i>in</i> the picture. Viewing the meeting from a
point of view, doesn't mean you're in the meeting. Viewing the world
without you from a point of view, doesn't mean you're in the world. So
although of course it's true, when I imagine these various
possibilities without me, I'm thinking about them. I'm observing them.
And I'm observing them from a particular perspective, from a particular
standpoint. For all that, I'm not <i>in</i> the picture that I'm
thinking about. So I think the Freudian argument just fails. Now, maybe
there's some other reason to believe the claim that nobody believes
they will cease to exist. But if there is another argument for that
claim, I'm eager to hear it, because this argument, at any rate, seems
to me to be unsuccessful.</p>

<p>Now, at the start, I distinguished two claims people might have in
mind when they say, "Nobody believes they're going to die." The first
possibility was the claim was, nobody believes that they'll ever cease
to exist as a person. And I've just explained why at least the most
familiar argument for that claim, I think, doesn't work. The second
possible interpretation was this. Nobody believes their body is going
to die. That is, the more familiar humdrum event of death where your
body ceases functioning and you end up having a corpse that gets buried
and so forth. Sometimes it's suggested that nobody believes that
either. Of course, often, I think, people run together these two
questions. When they say you don't believe you're going to die, do you
mean, you don't believe your body's going to die? or you don't believe
you're going to cease to exist as a person? Maybe when people make the
claim, it's not clear which of these things they've got in mind.</p>

<p>But let's, at least, try to now focus on the second question. Could
it be true, is there any good reason to believe it is true, that nobody
believes they're going to undergo bodily death? Now, after all, even if
you believe that, well, your soul will go to heaven so you won't cease
to exist as a person, you might still believe that your body will die.
Most of us presumably do believe our bodies will die. At least, that's
how it seems to me. So it's a bit odd to suggest, as it nonetheless
does get suggested, that no, no, at some level, people don't really
believe they're going to die.</p>

<p>Let me point out just how odd a claim that is. Because people do all
sorts of behaviors which become very, very hard to interpret if they
don't really believe their bodies are going to die. People, for
example, take out life insurance so that--well, here's what seems to be
the explanation. They believe that there's a decent chance that they
will die within a certain period of time. And so, if that happens, they
want their children and family members to be cared for. If you didn't
really believe you were going to die, that is undergo bodily death, why
would you take out life insurance? People write wills. "Here's what you
should do with my estate after I die." If you didn't really believe
that your body was going to die, why would you ever bother writing a
will? Since many people write wills, many people take out life
insurance, it seems as though the natural thing to suggest is that
many, or at least perhaps most, at least many people believe they're
going to die.</p>

<p>Why would we think otherwise? Well, the reason for thinking
otherwise, the reason for not being utterly dismissive of this
suggestion, is that when people get ill, terminally ill, it often seems
to take them by surprise. So I've been having you read Tolstoy's
novella, <i>The Death of Ivan Ilyich</i>. Ivan Ilyich falls, he hurts
himself. The injury doesn't get better. He gets worse and worse and
eventually it kills him. The astonishing thing is that Ivan Ilyich is
shocked to discover that he's mortal. And of course, what Tolstoy is
trying to convince us of, what he's trying to argue, by illustrating
the claim, I take it, that Tolstoy is making, is that most of us are
actually in Ivan Ilyich's boat. We give lip service to the claim that
we're going to die, but at some level, we don't really believe it.</p>

<p>And notice again, just to emphasize the point, the relevant lack of
belief here has to do with the death of the body. That's the thing that
Ivan Ilyich is skeptical about. Is his body going to die? Is he mortal
in that sense? This is what takes him aback, to discover that he's
mortal. For all we know, Ivan Ilyich still believes in souls, believes
he's going to go to heaven and so forth. So it's not his death as a
person that he's puzzled by. He may not think he's going to die as a
person. It's his bodily death that surprises him, his bodily mortality
that surprises him. Tolstoy draws a highly realistic and believable
portrait of somebody who is surprised to discover that he's mortal. As
he puts it, there's a famous syllogism that people learn in their logic
classes from Aristotle. All men are mortal. Socrates is a man, so
Socrates is mortal. Ivan Ilyich says, "Yes, yes, I knew that. But what
did that have to do with me?" Well, it may be a kind of irrationality.
It may be a kind of failure to conduct the logic. But we're not asking,
is it rational or irrational to not believe that your body's going to
die, we're simply asking, noting the fact that, there to seem to be
cases where people are surprised to discover that they're mortal.</p>

<p>Now, for all that, notice, I presume that Ivan Ilyich had a will.
And for all I know, Ivan Ilyich had life insurance. So we're in the
peculiar situation where on the one hand, some of Ivan Ilyich's
behaviors indicate that he believed he was mortal, that his body was
going to die. And yet, the shock and surprise that faces, that
overcomes him when he actually has to face his mortality, strongly
suggests that he's reporting correctly. He didn't believe he was going
to die.</p>

<p>How could that be? There's a kind of puzzle there as to--even if,
before we move to the question, how widespread are cases like this?
there's a puzzle as to how are we even to understand this case? We need
to distinguish perhaps between what he consciously believes and what he
unconsciously believes. Maybe at the conscious level he believed he was
mortal, but at the unconscious level he believed he was immortal.</p>

<p>Or maybe we need to distinguish between those things he gives a kind
of lip service to, versus those things he truly and fundamentally
believes. Maybe he gives lip service to the claim that he was mortal.
If you would have asked him "Are you mortal?" he would have said "Oh,
of course I am." And he buys life insurance accordingly. But does he
thoroughly and truly and fundamentally believe he's mortal? Perhaps
not. We need some such distinction if we're going to make sense of Ivan
Ilyich.</p>

<p>Well, let's suppose we've done it. Still have to ask, not, are there
are ever cases of people who don't believe they're going to die? but
rather, is there any good reason to think that we're all or most of us
are in that situation, are in that state of belief where, although we
give lip service to the claim that we're going to die, is there any
good reason to believe that fundamentally we don't actually believe it?
That's the question we have to turn to next time.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
