
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 18 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">March 29, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Last time I sketched the deprivation
account. That's a story or theory about what it is about death that
makes it bad. What's bad about death is the fact that, because you're
dead, because you don't exist, you're deprived of the good things in
life. Being dead isn't intrinsically bad. It's not like it's an
unpleasant experience. But it's comparatively bad. You're worse off by
virtue of the fact that you're not getting the things that you would
get, were you still alive. If I'm dead I can't spend time with my loved
ones. I can't look at sunsets. I can't listen to music. I can't discuss
philosophy. The deprivation account says, what's bad about death is the
fact that you're deprived of the good things in life.</p>

<p>Now, that seems pretty plausible, as a basic story goes. But as we
also saw last time, there are some philosophical puzzles about how it
could be. The question of when is death bad for you, and even more
importantly and more essentially, there's the difficulty of asking
ourselves, do we really believe it's possible for something to be bad
for you, when you don't even exist? We saw a series of difficult
choices. If we don't throw in an existence requirement, if we don't
say--to put it more positively, if we say things can be bad for you
even if you don't exist at all, then we're forced to say that things
are bad for Larry.</p>

<p>You'll recall that Larry was our name for a potential person,
somebody who could have come into existence but never actually does or
will come into existence. Well, talk about people who are deprived of
the good things in life, Larry's <i>completely</i> deprived of the good
things in life. If we think it doesn't matter whether or not you exist,
for things to be bad for you, then we have to say, "Oh, things are bad
for Larry." And not just Larry, but all of the 1.5 million, billion,
billion, billion never-to-be-born people. The number of potential
people is just staggering. And if we throw away an existence
requirement, we have to say it's a moral tragedy of unspeakable
proportions that these people are never born, that they never come into
existence.</p>

<p>Now, there are philosophers who are prepared to say that. But if
you're not prepared to say that, it looks as though you've got to
accept some kind of existence requirement. Why don't we feel sorry for
Larry and his billions upon billions of never-to-be-born compatriots?
Because, indeed, they don't exist. They're merely possible. And we
might say, you've got to exist in order for something to be bad for
you. But once we say that, it seems we're running towards the position
that, in that case, death can't be bad for me, because of course, when
I'm dead, I don't exist. So how can anything be bad for me?</p>

<p>I proposed at the end of class last time that we could try to solve
this problem by distinguishing between two versions of the existence
requirement--a more modest version and the bolder version. The bolder
version says, "In order for something to be bad for you, you've got to
exist at the very time that it's happening." If we say that, then
indeed, we can say, "It's not bad that Larry doesn't exist, because he
doesn't <i>exist</i> now." So there's nothing--even if we wanted to
think that there are good things he could be having, that's not bad for
him to not have them. He doesn't exist now. But it also, if we go all
the way to the bold existence requirement, we have to say, "Look, when
I'm dead that won't be bad for me, because, well, I won't exist
then."</p>

<p>But instead of accepting the bold existence requirement, we might
settle for something a little bit less demanding, the thing I dub "the
modest existence requirement." In order for something to be bad for
you, there has to have been a time, some time or the other, when you
exist. You've got to, as it were, exist at least <i>briefly</i> in
order to get into the club, as we might put it, of those creatures,
those possible creatures that we care about and are concerned about
morally. You have to have gotten in the club by at least having existed
for some period of time. But once you're in the club, things can be bad
for you, even if you don't happen to exist at that particular
moment.</p>

<p>If we accept the modest existence requirement, then we can say, it's
not bad that Larry doesn't exist, because, well, Larry doesn't get into
the club. In order to get into the club of things that we feel sorry
for, you have to have existed at least some moment or the other. Larry
and the billions upon billions upon billions of potential people who
never actually come into existence, they don't satisfy the requirement
of having existed at some time or the other. So we don't have to feel
sorry for them. But we can feel sorry for somebody who died last week
at the age of 10 because we can say, well, they existed, albeit very
briefly. And so they're in the club of beings that we can feel sorry
for and say, look, it's bad for them that they're not still alive.
Think of all the good things in life they would be getting if they were
still alive. So the modest existence requirement allows us to avoid
both extremes. Maybe then that's the position that we should
accept.</p>

<p>It may be, on balance, the best possible view here. But I just want
to emphasize that even the modest existence requirement is not without
its counterintuitive implications. Consider somebody's life. Suppose
that somebody's got a nice long life. Comes into existence,
leads--lives 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 years. Nice life. Now,
imagine that we bring it about that instead of living 90 years, they
have a somewhat shorter life--10, 20, 30, 40, 50 years. We've caused
them to die after 50 years as opposed to the 90 years they might have
otherwise had. Well, we can say, look, that's worse for them--to live
merely 50 years instead of the full 90 or 100 years. And if we accept
the modest existence requirement, we can say that, because after all,
whether you live 50 years or 90 years, you did exist at some time or
the other. So the fact that you lost the 40 years you otherwise would
have gotten, well, that's bad for you. There. Fair enough. That gives
us the answer we want. That's not counterintuitive.</p>

<p>Now, imagine that instead of living 50 years, the person lives only
10, 20 years and then dies. Well, that's worse still. Think of all the
extra goods they would have gotten if only they hadn't died then. And
if I caused them to die after 20 years instead of 50 or 90 years, I've
made things worse and worse. Imagine that I caused them to die after
one year. Worse still. All this is perfectly intuitive. The shorter
their life, the worse it is for them, the more they're deprived of the
good things in life. So 90-year life, not bad. 50-year life, worse.
10-year life, worse still. One-year life, worse still. One-month life,
worse still. One day life, worse still. One-minute life, worse still.
One-second life, worse still.</p>

<p>Now, imagine that I bring it about that the person never comes into
existence at all. Oh, that's fine.</p>

<p>See? That's the implication of accepting the modest existence
requirement. If I shortened the life they would have had so completely
that they never get born at all, or they never come into existence at
all, then they don't satisfy the requirement of having existed at some
time or the other. So although we were making things worse and worse
and worse and worse and worse as we shortened the life, when we finally
snip out that last little fraction of a second, it turns out we didn't
make things worse at all. Now we haven't done anything objectionable.
That's, it seems, what you've got to say if you accept the modest
existence requirement.</p>

<p>Of course, if we didn't have an existence requirement at all, we
could say, "Well look, worst of all, never to have been born at all."
Fair enough. But if you say that, then you've got to feel sorry for
Larry. You've got to feel sorry for the 1.5 million billion, billion,
billions.</p>

<p>So which view is it that on balance is the--I don't want to say
"most plausible." I think when we start thinking about these puzzles,
every alternative seems unattractive in its own way. Maybe the most we
could hope for is, which is the least <i>implausible</i> thing to say
here? I'm not altogether certain.</p>

<p>Let me turn to one more trouble or problem or puzzle for the
deprivation account. And this particular puzzle arises whether or not
we accept an existence requirement, whether or not we accept a bold
existence requirement, a modest existence requirement, or no existence
requirement, because we're going to deal with somebody who actually
does exist at some time or the other, namely you or me. This is
actually a puzzle that some of you may have written your paper on,
because it's the puzzle about Lucretius, the puzzle that Lucretius
gives us.</p>

<p>It's not a direct quote, but Lucretius basically says, look, most of
us are upset and anxious at the fact that we're going to die. We think
death is bad for us. There'll be this period after my death in which I
won't exist. And the deprivation account helps say why that's bad,
because during this period of nonexistence, you're not enjoying the
good things in life.</p>

<p>Fair enough, says Lucretius, but wait a minute. The period after you
die isn't the <i>only</i> period during which you don't exist. It's not
the only period in which if only you were still alive, you could still
be enjoying the good things in life. There's another period of
nonexistence. It's the period before my birth. I think I've just
switched the timeline here, but all right. Imagine this is the period
before my birth. Just like there'll be an infinite period after my
death in which I won't exist, and realizing that fills us with dismay,
there was, of course, an infinite period before I came into existence.
Well, if nonexistence is so bad and by the deprivation account it seems
that we want to say that it is, shouldn't I be upset at the fact that
there was this eternity before I was born?</p>

<p>But, says Lucretius, that's silly, right? Nobody's upset about the
fact that there was an eternity before they were born. In which case,
it doesn't make any sense to be upset about the eternity after you die
of nonexistence.</p>

<p>Well, Lucretius doesn't offer this as a puzzle. Lucretius offers
this as an argument that we should not be concerned about the fact that
we're going to die. Most philosophers aren't willing to go with
Lucretius all the way to the end of the bus, bus route. Most
philosophers want to say there's got to be something wrong with that
argument someplace. There's got to be some--</p>

<p>Well, what are the possibilities here? One possibility is indeed to
just agree with him, right? Nothing bad about the eternity before I was
born. So, nothing bad--of the eternity of nonexistence. So nothing bad
about the eternity of nonexistence after I die. That's one possibility,
to agree with Lucretius.</p>

<p>Second possibility is to say, look, Lucretius, you're right. We
really do need to treat these two eternities of nonexistence on a par.
But we could turn it around. Instead of saying with Lucretius, nothing
bad about this one, so nothing bad about this one, maybe we should say
instead, something bad about the one after we die, and so something bad
about the one before we were born. Maybe we should just stick to the
deprivation account and not lose faith in it. The deprivation account
says it's bad that there's this period after we die, because if only we
weren't dead then, we would still be able to enjoy the good things in
life. Maybe we should say, look, similarly then, when the deprivation
account tells us it's bad that there's this period before we come into
existence, when we don't exist. Because if only we had existed then,
we'd be able to enjoy the good things in life. Maybe Lucretius was
right, we have to treat both periods the same. But he's wrong in
thinking we shouldn't think either period is bad. Maybe we should think
<i>both</i> periods are bad. Well, that's a possibility.</p>

<p>What other possibilities are there? Another possibility is to say,
Lucretius, you're right, there are two periods of nonexistence, but
there's a justification for treating them differently. They're
asymmetrical in a way that makes sense from the point of view of what
we should care about.</p>

<p>Well, it's easy to <i>say</i> that. The puzzle--most philosophers
want to take that last way out. They want to say there's something that
explains why it makes sense, why it's reasonable, to care about the
eternity of nonexistence after my death, but where that doesn't apply
to the eternity of nonexistence before my birth. And then the puzzle is
to point to a difference that would justify that kind of rationally
asymmetrical treatment of the two periods. It's easy to <i>say</i> it's
okay, it's reasonable to treat them differently. The philosophical
challenge is to point to something that explains or justifies that.</p>

<p>Now, a very common response is to say something like this. Look,
consider the period after my death. I'm no longer alive. I have
<i>lost</i> my life. In contrast, the period before my birth, although
I'm not alive, I have not <i>lost</i> my life. I have never yet been
alive. And so, of course, you can't lose something you've never yet
had. So what's worse, this answer suggests, about the period after
death, is the fact that death involves <i>loss</i>, whereas prenatal
nonexistence does not involve loss. And so, the conclusion comes, and
now we see why it's okay to care more about that one than this one, the
one after death and the one before birth. Because the one after death
involves loss, and the one before birth does not.</p>

<p>Very, very common response, but I'm inclined to think that can't be
an adequate answer. It's true, of course, that this period involves
loss, because the very definition of "loss" is, you don't have
something that at an earlier time you did have. So this period involves
loss. But the period before birth does not involve loss, because
although I don't have life, I haven't, previous to the period, had
life, so I haven't <i>lost</i> anything.</p>

<p>Of course, there's another thing that's true about this prenatal
period, to wit, I don't have life and I'm <i>going</i> to get it. So I
don't yet have something that's going to come in the future. That's not
true about the post-life period. I've <i>lost</i> life. But it's not
true of this period that I don't have life and I'm going to get it in
the future. So this period involves <i>loss</i>.</p>

<p>Interesting. In fact, we don't have a name for this other state,
where you don't yet have something that you'll get later, but you don't
yet have it. Let's call that, not loss, let's call it "schmoss," okay?
So during this period, there's a loss of life, but no schmoss of life.
And in this period, there's no loss of life, but there's a schmoss of
life. And now we need to ask, as philosophers, why do we care more
about <i>loss</i> of life than <i>schmoss</i> of life? What is it about
the fact that we don't have something that we used to, that makes it
worse than not having something that we're going to? It's easy to
overlook the symmetry here, because we've got this nice word "loss,"
and we don't have this word "schmoss." But that's not really explaining
anything, it's just pointing to the thing that needs explaining. Why do
we care more about not having what once upon a time we did, than we
care about not having what once upon a time we will?</p>

<p>Well, there's some other proposals that we might make. A couple of
them have actually been sketched in some of your reading. So for
example, Tom Nagel [Nagel 1979], in his essay on death says, look,
here's the difference. It's easy enough to imagine--and indeed for
there to actually be a possibility of--my living longer. Suppose I die
at the age of 80 and if I didn't die, then I'd continue living 90, 100,
what have you. There it is. It's still me. When you imagine me with an
earlier--rather with living longer, you're imagining <i>me</i> living
longer. To use the vocabulary that we introduced in thinking about some
of Plato's arguments, we might say although --suppose I die at age
80--that's a fact about me, it's a <i>contingent</i> fact about me.
It's not a necessary fact about me that I died at 80.</p>

<p>Suppose at 80 I get hit by a car. It's not a necessary truth about
me that I got hit by a car. I could have not gotten hit by a car, and
lived to the ripe old age of 90 or 100. When you die is not an
essential feature of you, so it's easy for us to think about the
possibility in which I live longer. But, says Nagel, when I try to
imagine what would the alternative be, if I'm going to be upset about
the prenatal nonexistence, we have to imagine my being born earlier. I
was born in 1954. Should I be upset about the fact that I was born in
1954 instead of 1944? That's the analog of being upset about the fact
that I die in whatever it is, 2044 instead of living to 2054.</p>

<p>Nagel says, but look, when you try to think about the possibility in
which instead of being born in 1954, I was born in 1944--and for the
rest of you, you've got to plug in your own birthdates--Nagel says you
can't do it. The date of my death is a contingent fact about me. But
the date of my <i>birth</i> is not a contingent fact about me. And by
birth we don't really mean when I came out of the womb. That could be
changed, perhaps by having been delivered prematurely, or through
Caesarean, or what have you. We really mean the time at which I come
into existence. Let's suppose it's the time when the egg and the sperm
join. That's not a contingent moment in my story. That's an
<i>essential</i> moment in my life story.</p>

<p>How could that be? We say, couldn't my parents have had sex earlier,
10 years earlier? Sure they could have. But remember, if they had had
sex 10 years earlier, it would have been a different egg and a
different sperm coming together, so it wouldn't be <i>me</i>. It would
be some sibling of mine that, as it happens, never got born. But if,
had they had sex 10 years earlier, some sibling would have been born.
That's not me being born earlier. Different sperm, different egg makes
for a different person. So you can't--you can say the words, "if only
I'd been born earlier," but it's not actually metaphysically possible.
Well, it's an intriguing suggestion, but I think it can't quite be
right, or at the very least, it cannot be the complete story about how
to answer Lucretius' puzzle.</p>

<p>Suppose we've got a fertility clinic that has some sperm on hold,
and has some eggs on hold, in the sperm bank, in the egg bank, what
have you. And they keep them here frozen until they're ready to use
them. And they thaw them out in whatever it is, 2020. And then the
person's born. Of course, he could go back. He could look back and say,
if only they had put my sperm and egg together 10 years earlier. That
would still be me. After all, very same sperm, very same egg, makes for
the very same person. So if only they had combined my sperm and egg 10
years earlier, I would have been born 10 years earlier. Well, so
Nagel's wrong in saying it's not possible to imagine being born
earlier. In at least some cases, it is. Yet, if we imagine somebody
like this, somebody who's an offspring of this kind of fertility
clinic, and we ask, would they be upset that they weren't born earlier?
again, it still seems as though most people would say, "No, of course
not." So the Nagel answer doesn't seem to me to be an adequate one.</p>

<p>Well, there's another possible answer. This is Fred Feldman's
answer, also in the one of the papers that you've read. Fred Feldman
says--Nagel's a contemporary philosopher, Fred Feldman's a contemporary
philosopher. Feldman says, when I imagine--suppose I get killed by the
bus in 2044, and if I imagine if only I hadn't died then, what is it
that we imagine? We imagine instead of living 80 years, living 90 or 95
or more. We imagine a longer life.</p>

<p>But what is it that happens when I say, if only I'd been born
earlier? Well, says Feldman, you don't actually imagine a longer life,
you just <i>shift</i> the entire life and start it earlier. After all,
suppose we just said--especially if I had asked you this question
before setting all of this up--but if only you'd been born in 1800.
Nobody thinks, "Oh, if only I'd been born in 1800, I'd still be alive.
I'd be 200 years old." You think, "Oh, if I'd been born in 1800, I
would have died in 1860, 1870, 1880," whatever it is.</p>

<p>When we imagine being born earlier, we don't imagine a longer life.
Nothing better about having a life <i>earlier</i>, according to the
deprivation account. But when we imagine not dying when we actually
die, we say, "If only I died in 2050 instead of 2040," it's not that we
imagine having been <i>born</i> later. We don't shift the life forward.
We imagine a <i>longer</i> life. So, Feldman says, no wonder, no
surprise that you care about the nonexistence after death. Because when
you imagine <i>that</i> being different, you imagine a <i>longer</i>
life. But when you start thinking about the nonexistence before birth
and you imagine <i>that</i> being different, you don't imagine
<i>more</i> goods in life, you just imagine them taking place at a
different time.</p>

<p>Well, that's an interesting possibility, I suppose. It doesn't seem
to me--again, that it's got to be--maybe it's part of the story, but it
doesn't seem like it's going to be the complete story. Because we could
imagine cases where the person just thinks, look, if only I'd been born
earlier, I <i>would</i> have had a longer life.</p>

<p>Let's suppose that next week astronomers discover the horrible fact
that there's an asteroid that's about to land on the Earth and wipe out
all life. So here it is, it's going to come on January 1, 2008. And
there you are, at whatever your age is, 20 years old, 21 years old, on
January-on December 31, 2008 thinking, I've only had 20 years of life.
If only I'd been born earlier. If only, instead of being born, whenever
it was, I'd been born 10 years earlier, I would have had 30 years of
life instead of 20 years of life. That seems perfectly intelligible. So
it does seem as though, if we put our head into it, we can get
ourselves into thought experiments where we say, yeah, don't just shift
the life, make it longer. But instead of making it longer in the
post-death direction, make it longer in the pre-birth direction.</p>

<p>Again, you can imagine somebody saying, "Yeah, and when we do that,
we should feel the same." It doesn't really matter which direction it
goes. So symmetry is the right answer after all. When I think about the
asteroid example, I find myself thinking, huh, maybe symmetry <i>is</i>
the right way to go here. Maybe Feldman's right, that normally we just
shift instead of extending. But if I'm careful to extend, maybe that
really <i>is</i> bad that I didn't get started sooner and have a longer
life in that direction.</p>

<p>Well, here's one other answer that's been proposed. This is by yet
another contemporary philosopher, Derek Parfit. Parfit says, it's true
that when I think about the nonexistence after I die, that's loss,
whereas the nonexistence before I'm born, that's not loss, that's mere
schmoss. And it's true that we need an explanation about why loss is
worse than schmoss. But we can see that this is not an arbitrary
preference on our part, because in fact, it's part of a quite general
pattern we have of caring about the future in a way that we don't care
about the past. This is a very deep fact about human caring. We are
oriented towards the future and concerned about what happens in it, in
a way that we're not oriented and concerned about what happened in the
past.</p>

<p>Parfit's got a very nice example to bring the point home. He says,
imagine that you've got some condition, some medical condition that
will kill you unless you have an operation. So fair enough, you're
going to have the operation. This will allow you to live your life.
Unfortunately, in order to perform the operation, they can't have you
anesthetized. You have to be awake, perhaps in order to tell the
surgeon "Yeah, that's where it hurts," whatever it is. Sort of like
when the dentist pokes and says, "Does this hurt? Does that hurt?" So
you've got to be awake during the operation and it's a very painful
operation. We can't give you pain killer, because then you won't be
able to point out, does this hurt, does that hurt, and so forth and so
on. Since we can't give you pain killer, all we can do is this. So,
you'll be awake during this, basically being tortured. You'll be awake
being tortured. It's still worth doing it, because this will cure the
condition, so then you'll have a nice long life.</p>

<p>Since we can't give you pain killers and we can't put you out, all
we're going to do is, what we will do is this: After the operation is
over, we'll give you this very powerful medication, which will give you
short-term, sort of very localized, amnesia. You won't remember
anything about the operation itself. So you won't have to at least to
dwell upon these horrible memories of having been tortured. Those will
be completely wiped out. Okay, so painful operation. You're awake
during it. After the operation, you're given this thing that makes you
forget whether you've had the operation, anything about the operation
at all. And that the preceding 24 hours will be completely wiped
out.</p>

<p>So you're in the hospital and you wake up and you ask yourself,
"Huh, have I had the operation yet or not?" Don't know, right? Because
of course, if I haven't had it, no wonder I don't remember it, but if I
have had it, I would have been given that temporary sort of localized
amnesia. So of course I wouldn't know whether or not I've had it. So
you ask the nurse, "Have I had the operation yet or not?" She says, "I
don't know, we have a couple on the hall today who are, some of whom
have had it and some of whom are scheduled to have it later today. I
don't remember which one you are. Let me go look at your file. I'll
come back and I'll tell you." So she wanders off. She's going to come
back in a minute or two. And as you're waiting for her to come back,
you ask yourself, what do you want the answer to be? Are you
indifferent, or do you care whether you're one of the people who's
already had it, or somebody who hasn't yet had it?</p>

<p>Now, if you're like Parfit, and for that matter, like me, then
you're going to say, of course I care. I want it to be the case that
I'm one of the people who's <i>already</i> had the operation. I don't
want to be one of the people who hasn't yet had the operation.</p>

<p>You might say, how can that make any sense? Your life's going to
have the operation sooner or later. At some point in your life history,
that operation is going to have occurred. And so there's the same
amount of pain and torture, regardless of whether you're one of the
people that had it yesterday or one of the people that's going to have
it tomorrow. But for all that, says Parfit, the fact of the matter is
perfectly plain, that we <i>do</i> care. We want the pain to be in the
past. We don't want the pain to be in the future. We care more about
what's happening in the future than we care about what's happening in
the past.</p>

<p>That being the case, no surprise we care about the nonexistence in
the future in a way we don't care about the nonexistence in the past.
Well, that may be right as far as explanation goes, but we might still
wonder whether or not it's any kind of justification. The fact that
we've got this deep-seated asymmetrical attitude towards time doesn't
in any way, as far as I can see, yet tell us whether or not that's a
<i>justified</i> attitude. Maybe evolution built us to care about the
future in a way that we don't care about the past and this shows up in
lots of places, including Parfit's hospital case, including our
attitude towards loss versus schmoss, and so forth and so on. But the
fact that we've got this attitude doesn't yet show that it's a
<i>rational</i> attitude.</p>

<p>How could we show that it's a rational attitude? Well, maybe we'd
have to start doing some heavy-duty metaphysics, if what we've been
doing so far isn't yet heavy-duty enough. Maybe we need to talk about
the difference between--the metaphysical difference between the past
and the future. The past is fixed, the future is open, the direction of
time. Maybe somehow we could bring all these things in and explain why
our attitudes towards time make sense. I'm not going to go there. All I
want to say is it's not altogether obvious what the best answer to
Lucretius' puzzle is.</p>

<p>So when I say, as I have said--and I'm going to say it many times
over the course of the remaining weeks--that the central thing that's
bad about death is the fact that you're deprived of the good things in
life, when I make use of the deprivation account, I don't mean to
suggest everything is sweetness and light with regard to the
deprivation account. I think there are some residual puzzles about how
it could be that death is bad. And in particular, how it could be that
the deprivation account puts its finger on what's bad about death.</p>

<p>But for all that, it seems to me the right way to go. It seems to me
that the deprivation account does put its finger on the central bad
thing about death. Most centrally, what's bad about death is that when
you're dead, you're not experiencing the good things in life. Death is
bad for you because you don't have what life would bring you, if only
you hadn't died. All right.</p>

<p>If that's right, should we conclude, in fact, do we <i>have</i> to
conclude--if death is bad because of it's a deprivation, then if I
wasn't dead, I wouldn't be deprived--so doesn't it follow then that the
best thing of all is never to die at all, to wit, immortality? If it's
bad--suppose I get hit by a truck next week, that's bad, because if
only I hadn't gotten hit by a truck, I might have lived another 20, 30
years, whatever. I would have gotten the good things in life that would
have been better for me. Ah, but when I die of whatever it is, some
heart disease at age 80, that's bad maybe because if only I didn't have
heart disease, I could have lived another 10, 15, 20 years, gotten more
good things in life. If only I hadn't died at 100, I would have gotten
more good things in life. If only I hadn't died at 500, I would have
gotten more good things in life. <i>Whenever</i> it is I die, won't it
always be true, if we accept the deprivation account, that if only I
hadn't died then, I would have gotten more good things in life? And so
whenever it is you die, death is bad for you. So the best thing for you
would be never to die, immortality.</p>

<p>Two questions really that we need to ask. One is: Does consistency,
does logic, require somebody who accepts the deprivation account--does
consistency require that if you accept the deprivation account, you
believe immortality's a good thing? Second question: Even if logic
doesn't require that, is it <i>true</i> that immortality's a good
thing? Let me start with the first one, because I think that's the
easier one.</p>

<p>Logic alone, logic plus the consistency requirement--rather and the
deprivation account--logic alone doesn't require us to say
immortality's a good thing. Why? Because strictly speaking, what the
deprivation account says is, death is bad insofar as you're deprived of
the good things in life by virtue of not existing. If only you hadn't
gotten hit by that truck, you would have gone on to an exciting life in
your career as a professional dancer. You would have had a family, or
what have you. Whatever it is. You would have traveled around the
world. Life would have given you a lot of great things and you get
deprived of those great things, that's why it's bad that you got hit by
the truck. That is to say, death is bad, when it's bad, by virtue of
the fact that it deprives you of the good things in life.</p>

<p>But suppose--we don't yet know whether this could actually happen,
but here we're just talking about logical possibilities--suppose that
there's no more good things for life to give you. Then when you're
deprived of life by death, you're not being deprived of any good
things, and so it's not bad for you to be dead at that point. Death is
only bad, according to the deprivation account, when there are good
things that would have come your way. When, as we might put it, on
balance, the life you would have had would have continued to be good
for you. When that happens, then to lose that good bit of life, that's
bad for you. But if it should turn out that what life would have had
hereafter, instead of being good, would have been hellish, it's not bad
for you to avoid that. It might actually be <i>good</i> for you to
avoid it. So, even if we accept the deprivation account, we're not
committed to the claim that death is always bad. We have to look and
see, what would life actually hold out for us? Logic alone, plus the
deprivation account, doesn't force us to say immortality would be a
good thing.</p>

<p>After all--this is really a crucial point to understand--things that
are good for you in limited quantities can become bad for you if you
get more and more and more and more of them. Well, I love chocolate. So
suppose somebody comes up to me with a box of Godiva chocolate, offers
me a couple of chocolates. I say, "Wonderful! I love Godiva chocolate."
And then they give me some more and some more. Twenty pieces of
chocolate. Well, you know, by the time I got 20 pieces of chocolate,
I'm not sure right now if I really want the 21<sup>st</sup> piece. But
you keep giving me some more. Thirty pieces of chocolate, 40 pieces of
chocolate, 100 pieces of chocolate. At some point--I've never actually
had his much chocolate; I don't know what the point is, but at
<i>some</i> point--I'm going to say, you know, although the first 10,
20, 30 pieces of chocolate, those were good, but giving me the
21<sup>st</sup> piece of chocolate or the 50<sup>th</sup> piece of
chocolate, no longer good. Logically, at least, it could happen.</p>

<p>Logically, it could happen that although in quantities, small
quantities, 50 years, 60 years, 100 years, life is good, at some point,
maybe life would turn bad for us. Just like being force-fed more and
more chocolate. And if it did turn bad for us, the deprivation account
would allow us to say, oh, at that point, dying's not bad for you.</p>

<p>Well, that's all that logic tells us. Logic simply tells us we don't
<i>have</i> to believe immortality's a good thing. But for all that, it
could still <i>be</i> a good thing. So that's question number two.
Let's ask, what should we think about the prospect of living forever?
Would it, in fact, be better and better and better? Somebody dies at
age 10 by some horrible disease, better if they'd made it up to 40.
Somebody dies at age 40, better if they'd made it up to 80. Somebody
dies at age 80, better if they'd made it to 100, 120. Is it true that
life would get better and better and better, the longer it is?</p>

<p>Now, in asking this question, we have to be careful to be clear
about what exactly we're imagining. Here's one way to try to imagine
that story. Imagine that life is sort of the way it works now, with the
kinds of changes that bodies undergo as they get older. But instead of
those changes basically killing you at 80, 90, or 100, they don't. You
get more and more of those changes, but they never actually kill you.
This is the sort of thought experiment that Jonathan Swift undertakes
in the passage from <i>Gulliver's Travels</i> that I've had you look
at. He imagines Gulliver coming to a country where a subset of the
people live forever, immortals. And at first, Gulliver says, "Oh, isn't
this wonderful?" But he forgot to think about the fact that if the
kinds of changes that we undergo continue to accumulate, then you're
getting older. Not just older, but weaker, in more and more discomfort,
senility sets in with a vengeance, until eventually you've got these
creatures that live forever, but their mind is gone, and they're sort
of in pain and they can't do anything because their body's utterly
infirm and diseased and sick. That's not a wonderful thing to have. If
immortality was like <i>that</i>, says Swift, that would be horrible.
For an immortality like that, death would be a blessing. And Montaigne,
in the essay that I've had you look at, says indeed, death is a
blessing, because it puts an end to the pain and suffering and misery
that afflict us in our old age.</p>

<p>Well, all of that seems right, but I suppose we'd be forgiven for
thinking, look, when we wanted to be immortal, we didn't want
<i>this</i> kind of life going on and on and on with the same
trajectory, the same downward trajectory. We sort of wanted to live
forever, hail and hearty and healthy. So even if the real world
wouldn't allow us that, let's just ask science fictiony whether or not
in fact living forever would be good. Isn't it at least true that in
principle, living forever could be good? You've got to imagine changing
some of the facts about what it would be like to live forever.</p>

<p>So instead of asking the question, the question I started with,
would it be good to live forever? --If you're not careful, this is
going to be like one of those horror stories, right? Where you've got a
couple of wishes and you aren't careful about how exactly you state the
wish. And so you get what you want, but it ends up being a nightmare,
right? If you just tell the fairy who gives you three wishes, "I want
to live forever," and you forgot to say "and be sure to keep me
healthy," well, that's going to be a nightmare. That's what Swift told
us. So let's be careful. Let's throw in health and anything else you
want. Throw in enough money to make sure you're not poor for eternity.
Wouldn't that be horrible, to be healthy but <i>impoverished</i>
forever? Throw in whatever you want. All we need to ask at that this
point is, is there any way at all to imagine immortality, where
immortality of that sort would be a good thing? Is there any way to
imagine existing forever where that would be good for you,
<i>forever</i>?</p>

<p>Now, it's very tempting at this point to say, look, of course.
Nothing could be easier. Just imagine being in <i>heaven</i> forever,
right? You're done, right? You've got heavenly bliss. Isn't this
incredible? Wouldn't we all love to be in heaven forever? The trouble
is, we were a little bit vague about what exactly life is like in
heaven. It's a striking fact that even those religions that promise us
an eternity in heaven are rather shy on the details. Why? Because, one
might worry, if you actually tried to fill in the details, this
wonderful, eternal existence ends up not seeming so wonderful after
all.</p>

<p>So imagine that what's going to happen is that we all become angels
and we're going to spend eternity singing psalms. Now, I like psalms
and I actually enjoy rather singing psalms at services. On Saturday
mornings, I sing psalms in Hebrew and I rather enjoy it. But if you ask
me: What about the possibility of an eternity of doing that? That
doesn't really seem so desirable. <i>Bedazzled</i>, not the remake. I
haven't seen the remake, but the original. In the original, there's a
human character who hooks up with the devil. He meets the devil and he
asks the devil, "So why did you rebel against God?" The devil says,
"Well, I'll show you. You sit here on the--" whatever it was, the
mailbox, I think it was. "I'll sit up here on the mailbox," the devil
says. "And you dance around me and say, ‘Oh, praise the lord, aren't
you wonderful? You're so magnificent. You're so glorious.'" And the
human does this for a while and he says, "This has gotten really
boring. Can't we switch?" And the devil says, "That's exactly what I
said."</p>

<p>Now, when you try to imagine heaven singing psalms for eternity,
that doesn't seem so attractive. All right, so don't imagine heaven
singing psalms for eternity. Just imagine something else. But what?
Imagine what? This is the thought experiment that I invite you to
participate in. What kind of life can you imagine, such that having
that life forever would be good? Not just for another 10 years, not
just for another 100 years, not just for another 1,000 years, or
million years, or a billion years. Remember, eternity is a very, very
long time. Forever goes on <i>forever</i>. Can you describe an
existence that you would want to be stuck with forever?</p>

<p>Now, it's precisely at this point that Bernard Williams, in another
one of the papers I had you take a look at--Bernard Williams says no
[Williams 1978]. No kind of life would be one that would be desirable
and attractive forever. No kind of life at all. In short, says
Williams, every life would eventually become tedious and worse,
excruciatingly painful. Every kind of life is a life you would
eventually want to be rid of. Immortality, far from being a wonderful
thing, would be a horrible thing.</p>

<p>Suppose, for the moment, that we were to agree with Williams. What
then should we say? We might say--look, at least when we're being
careful, if we agree that immortality would be bad, we can't say then
that death, per se, is bad. The very fact that I am going to die turns
out not to be a bad thing, because after all, the only alternative to
dying is immortality. And if immortality would be a <i>bad</i> thing,
then death is not a <i>bad</i> thing. Death is a <i>good</i> thing. We
might say, if we accept Williams' thought, the fact of our mortality is
good rather than bad, if immortality would eventually be bad.</p>

<p>Now of course, crucial to notice that even if we say this, that
doesn't mean that when you get hit by a car tomorrow, that that's good.
You don't have to say that. You can still say it's a bad thing that I
got hit by a car tomorrow, because after all, if I hadn't gotten hit by
a car tomorrow, it's not as though I would have been condemned to
immortality, I just would have lived another 10 or 20 or 30 years. And
those years would have been good ones for me. And maybe even when I
die--let's suppose I live to the ripe old age of 100--when I die at
100, I could perhaps still say, it's a bad thing for me that I die at
the age of 100. Because if I hadn't died now, I might have lived
another 10, 20, 30 years and still enjoyed things in life, enjoyed
playing with my great grandchildren, whatever it is.</p>

<p>To say that immortality is bad is not to say it's a good thing that
we die when we do. You can still believe
consistency--consistently--that we die <i>too soon</i>. Even if in
principle, eventually, sooner or later, death would no longer be bad,
it could be that it comes too soon for all of us.</p>

<p>Still, the question we want to ask is, is there any way even to
<i>imagine</i> an immortal life that would be worth having? In
principle, could immortality be a good thing? Or, is Williams right,
that no, even in principle, go as fantastic and science fictiony as you
want, in principle an immortal life could not be desirable? So until
next time, I invite you to think that question through. If you're
trapped into the prospect of immortality, what would the <i>best</i>
kind of immortal life be like?</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<p>---</p>

<p><strong>Resources</strong></p>

<p>Nagel, Thomas. 1979. "Death." In <i>Mortal Questions</i>. New York:
Cambridge University Press.</p>

<p>Williams, Bernard. 1978. "The Makropulos Case: Reflections on the
Tedium of Immortality." In <i>Language, Metaphysics, and Death</i>.
Edited by John Donnelly. New York: Fordham University Press.</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
