
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 20 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">April 5, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Last time, I invited you to think
about life on the experience machine, where the scientists are busy
stimulating your brain in such a way as to give you an exact replica,
from the insides of what it would be like having identical experiences
to the ones you would have if you were really doing--well, whatever it
is that's worth doing. Climbing the alps, writing the great American
novel, raising a great family that loves you, being creative. Whatever
it is you think is worth having, the experience machine gives you all
the experiential side of those things. But you're not really doing
those things. You're actually just floating in the scientist's lab.</p>

<p>And we ask ourselves, would you want to live a life on the
experience machine? Would you be happy or would you be unhappy, to
discover that you actually have been living a life on the experience
machine? Most of us, when we think about this, find ourselves wanting
to say, no, we wouldn't want to have a life on the experience machine.
I've been discussing this sort of example for many, many years. And
there's always a group of people who think, yes, life on the experience
machine is perfect as long as you've got the right tape playing. But
the vast majority always says, no, there's something missing from that
life. It's not the ideal of human existences; it's not the best
possible life we can imagine ourselves having.</p>

<p>But that means, if we think something's missing, we then have to ask
yourselves, what's missing? What's wrong with the experience machine?
The one thing we can conclude immediately is, if you think life on the
experience machine is missing something, that the hedonist--and views
like hedonism--must be wrong, insofar as they say that all that matters
for the best possible life is--for well-being--is getting the right
kinds of experiences, getting the right kinds of mental states. Because
by hypothesis, the experience machine gets the mental states right, get
the insides right. So, if something's missing from that life, there's
more to the best kind of life than just having the right mental states,
than just getting the insides right.</p>

<p>Well, we ask ourselves then, well, what's missing? I think different
people will answer that in different ways. And if we had more time we
could spell out rival theories of well-being, which could be
interestingly distinguished one from another in terms of how they
answer the question, "What's missing from the experience machine?" on
the one hand, and "Why are the things that are missing from the
experience machine worth having?" Different theories of well-being
might answer that in different ways. Instead of trying to pursue those
alternative theories in a systematic fashion, let me just gesture
toward some of the things that seem to be missing from that kind of
life.</p>

<p>Well, first of all, and most, perhaps, obviously--if you're just
spending your life floating in the scientist's lab, you're not actually
accomplishing anything. You're not actually getting the things out of
life you thought you were getting. You wanted to be climbing the
mountain, but you're not actually climbing a mountain. You're just
floating there. You wanted to be writing the great American novel, but
you're not writing the great American novel. You're just floating
there. You wanted to be finding the cure for cancer, but you're not
actually finding the cure for cancer. You wanted to be loved, but
you're not actually loved. You're just floating there. Nobody other
than the scientist even knows that you exist. So, there's a variety of
things you wanted. You wanted to know your place in the universe, but
you don't even have that kind of knowledge either, because you think
you're writing novels, finding the cure for cancer, climbing Mount
Everest. You're completely deceived about all those things. So you
don't have the kind of self-knowledge that many of us value.</p>

<p>Well, as I say, different theories would try to systematize these
examples in different ways; that we don't have any kind of
accomplishments, we don't have knowledge, we're not in the right kinds
of loving relationships. Different theories might have different
explanations as to--are these things valuable because we want them, or
do we want them because we recognize they're valuable?</p>

<p>Rather than trying to pursue those questions--, And indeed, trying
to work out the details of these views would be complicated as well.
Take the example of accomplishment. Well, we all think accomplishment's
important, but it's not as though any old accomplishment is important.
If somebody sets themselves--or so it seems to me at least--if somebody
sets theirself the goal of making the biggest rubber band ball in the
Eastern United States, I suppose there's a sense of the word that
that's an accomplishment if they've got it, but it doesn't strike me as
the kind of accomplishment which makes for a particularly valuable
life. So, we might have to distinguish between any old accomplishment
and genuinely valuable accomplishments. But again, just put those
details aside.</p>

<p>We can say that there are certain things that are good above and
beyond experiences--the right kinds of accomplishments, the right kind
of knowledge. After all, not every bit of knowledge is equally
valuable. It's one thing to know your place in the universe, or to know
the fundamental laws of physics. It's another thing to know what was
the average rainfall in Bangkok in 1984. I'm not clear that that kind
of knowledge gives a whole lot of value to your life. So, we need the
right kinds of accomplishments and the right kind of knowledge and the
right kinds of relationships.</p>

<p>But imagine you've worked that out. The crucial point is that it
takes more to have the best kind of life than just getting the insides
right. It also requires getting the outsides right--whatever that comes
to--having in your life not just experiences but the right kinds of
goods or accomplishments or whatever term we use for it.</p>

<p>Now, let's say, instead of pursuing the questions of how exactly
that theory should go, notice that if we had that theory we could still
evaluate in principle--whatever the practical difficulties might be--in
principle we could still evaluate rival lives. We could talk about
adding up all the positive experiences along with all the--ask yourself
how many goods, how many accomplishments of the right sort were in that
life? And that's on the positive side of the ledger. And against that
we would then have to subtract the sum total of the negative
experiences, all the failures and deceptions or what have you. Those
would count against the overall value of your life. We could still say
it's--how good your life is, is a matter of adding up the goods and
subtracting the bads. But we would now have a somewhat broader, or more
encompassing or inclusive, list of goods, and a more broad and
encompassing list of bads--not just experience, but also these various
other accomplishments, whatever exactly that list comes to.</p>

<p>So, we could still evaluate rival lives. My life would've gone
better had I chosen to become a farmer instead of chosen to become a
doctor. Or my life would've gone better for this period of ten years,
but then it would've become worse. Or what have you. Or when we ask
ourselves, how will things go for me over the next couple of weeks if I
go on vacation versus staying back here? We add up the goods, subtract
the bads--whatever our favorite list is--and we come to our best
educated guess about the rival evaluations of not just lives as a
whole, but chunks of lives.</p>

<p>Now, what do those totals come to? Well, you might think it's an
empirical question, and in fact I am inclined to think it's an
empirical question, varying from person to person. But it's worth
taking a moment to flag the fact that there are people, there are
philosophers, who think we can generalize across all humans. You might
say that optimists are people who think that for everybody in every
case, in every circumstance, the total is always positive. "Life's
always worth living; it's always better than non-existence." That's
what the optimist thinks--not just for themselves individually, but for
everybody, the total is always positive.</p>

<p>Against that, I suppose, you've got pessimists--pessimists who say,
"No, no. Although life perhaps has some good things, the overall grand
balance is negative for everybody in every circumstance. We'd all be
better off dead, or perhaps more accurately still, all be better off
never having been born in the first place." That's what the pessimists
say.</p>

<p>And in between the optimists on the one hand and the pessimists on
the other, you've got moderates who say, "It varies. And for some
people the balance is positive, for some people perhaps the balance is
negative, whether for their life as a whole or for certain stretches of
their lives." We then have to get down to facts about cases, try to
describe the instance, perhaps somebody who's in the terminal stages of
some illness where they're in a great deal of pain. And the various
other external goods of life, they can't--because they're bedridden,
they can no longer accomplish things, perhaps their family has
abandoned them. Whatever the details might be, we could describe lives
and say, whether or not their life was good as a whole, what the future
holds out for them is negative. That's what the moderates would say. It
varies from case to case.</p>

<p>Well, however we settle that issue, notice there's still one other
assumption that all these positions still have in common. We've
expanded our list of goods so that--Nobody's going to deny that among
the goods of life are pleasure and other positive experiences. And
among the bads of life are pain and other negative experiences. But
we've expanded the list of goods so it includes external goods and not
only experiential or internal goods.</p>

<p>Still, the views that I've been sketching all still have the
following assumption in common. How good it is to be alive is a matter
of adding up all of the--call it the <i>contents</i> of life. Add up
your experiences and your accomplishments and the particular details of
your life as what the story is about. It's as though we've been
assuming, and I have been assuming up to this moment, that being alive
per se has no value. It's--life itself is a container which we fill
with various goods or bads. And deciding how valuable it is, how good
it is for me to be alive is a matter of adding up the value of the
contents of the life. But the container itself is a mere container. It
has no value in and of itself. We could say that what I've been
presupposing up to this point is the "neutral container theory" of the
value of life. Hedonism is a version of the neutral container theory.
How valuable--how well off you are, how valuable your life is, is a
function of the contents, the pleasure and the pain. We've expanded the
list of goods that can go <i>within</i> your life, but for all that,
we've still been acting as though the neutral container theory is the
right approach.</p>

<p>But against this there are those who think, no, in addition to
thinking about the value of the content of life, we have to
remember--so these people claim--that life itself is worth having.
There's a benefit to me above and beyond the question of what's going
on within my life--am I loved, am I accomplishing things, am I having
nice experiences or not? Above and beyond the question of the contents
of my life, we have to remember that the mere fact that I'm alive gives
my life some value. So, these are "valuable container" theories.</p>

<p>Now, think about what it would mean to accept a valuable container
theory. You're saying that being alive per se has some positive value.
Well, actually, the first remark is, probably wouldn't be completely
accurate to say, to describe these views as saying, "It's being alive
per se." After all, a blade of grass is alive, and I presume that even
fans of the, what we might call valuable container theories, don't
think that, "Oh, wouldn't it be wonderful if--as long as I was alive in
the way that a blade of grass is alive." Life may have value in and of
itself, but it's not <i>mere</i> life. What we want is the life of a
human. We want a life in which we're accomplishing things, there's
agency, and the life of knowing things. Because you have to be a knower
in order to have knowledge. The life of somebody who can have an
emotional side. So, it's something like the life of a person that, when
we say, when there are people who are inclined to say, that being alive
per so is valuable, presumably what they mean is being alive as a
person per se is valuable. All right. Note that point; keep it in mind.
For simplicity I'll talk about these views as though they say life per
se is valuable.</p>

<p>Actually, I suppose there could be a more extreme view still. It
seems implausible to me, but I suppose it's worth noticing there are
people who think, "No, being alive per se, right--even though there I
am and my brain has been so thoroughly destroyed that I'm not longer
able to know anything, no longer able to relate emotionally to anybody,
no longer able to accomplish anything, there I am in a persistent
vegetative state, but at least I'm alive." You can imagine somebody who
has that view. I've got to say I find that a pretty implausible view.
So I'm going to restrict myself, at least when I think about it, to
versions that say, it's the life of a person per se that's
valuable.</p>

<p>Now, notice that if we accept this view to decide how well off I am,
or somebody else is, you can't just add up the contents of the life.
You can't just add up all the pleasures and subtract the pains, or add
up all the accomplishments and subtract the failures, or add up all the
knowledge and subtract the ignorance and deception. Doing that in terms
of the contents gives you a subtotal, but that subtotal is no longer
the entire story. Because we also have to add in, if we accept a
valuable container theory, we also have to add in some extra positive
points to take account of the fact that, well, at least you're alive or
have the life or a person--or whatever it is that you think is valuable
in and of itself. So first we get the content subtotal; then we add
some extra points for the mere fact that you're alive.</p>

<p>Now, notice that since we are adding extra positive facts, extra
positive points, for the fact that you're alive, even if the contents
subtotal is negative, the <i>grand</i> total could still be positive.
Suppose that being alive per se is worth plus a hundred points, just to
make up some number. Even if your content subtotal was negative ten,
that doesn't mean you're not better off alive, because negative ten
plus the extra hundred points for the mere fact that you're alive is
still going to give you a positive total, plus 90. So, the point of
thinking about the possibility of accepting a valuable container theory
is to remind us that in deciding are you better off dead, has death
deprived me of something good or not, it's important to not just focus
on the contents but to also remember to add some positive points above
and beyond the content subtotal to take into account the value of the
sheer fact that you're alive.</p>

<p>If you're a fan of the neutral container theory, you won't have
anything extra to add, because life per se is just a zero. It's
strictly a matter of the contents. But if you accept a valuable
container theory, you have to add something more. And so even if, you
might say, the way my life is going in terms of its contents is bad,
being alive per se might still be a good thing. Have to add some extra
points.</p>

<p>How much extra? Well, here we're going to have, of course, more
modest and more bold versions of the valuable container theory. Let me
just distinguish two broad types. What we might call modest versions of
the valuable container theory say, although being alive per se is good,
if the contents of your life get bad enough, that can outweigh the
value of being alive so that the grand total is negative. Modest
container theories, that is, say there's <i>a</i> value to being alive,
but it can in principle be outweighed. Whether it gets outweighed
easily, or whether it's very, very difficult and the contents have to
be horrible to outweigh it, depends on how much value you think being
alive per se has. So, those are modest theories--positive value for
life, but it can be outweighed.</p>

<p>Against that, you can imagine someone who thinks being alive per se
is so incredibly valuable that no matter <i>how</i> horrible the
contents are, the grand total will always be positive. It's as though
being alive is infinitely valuable in comparison to questions about the
contents. We could call this the "fantastic valuable container theory"
as opposed to the "modest valuable container theory." I suppose that
label gives away where I want to come down on this. I find the
fantastic valuable container theory fantastic in the sense of
incredible. I can't bring myself to believe it, which--I have some
sympathies for valuable container theories, but I also have some
sympathy for neutral container theories. Sometimes I'm drawn toward the
neutral view; sometimes I'm drawn toward the thought that being alive
per se is good for you. But even in those moments when I'm drawn
towards valuable container theories, it's always the modest version. I
don't find myself drawn toward the fantastic version.</p>

<p>Now, if we make these distinctions, then again, remembering that the
question we've been asking ourselves is, "So why is death bad?" The
deprivation account says, death is bad for you insofar as, or it's bad
for you when, by virtue of dying now, what you've been deprived of is,
another chunk of life that would've been good for you to have. And what
we now see is that--to see whether that could be the case or not, we've
got to get clear in our own minds about whether we believe in a neutral
container theory, a positive, valuable container theory or--and among
those, between a fantastic and a modest container theory.</p>

<p>If we are neutralists, we're going to say, the question is, what
would the contents of my life have been, for the next year, ten years,
whatever? If that would've been worth having, then--if the next chunk
of my life would've been worth having--then it's bad for me that I die
now instead of living for the next ten years. On the other hand, if the
balance from here on out would've been negative, then it's good for me
that I died now instead of being kept alive with a life not worth
living. That's how the neutralists put it.</p>

<p>If we are <i>valuable</i> container theorists, we think the answer
has got to be, well, look at the contents, but don't forget to add some
extra points, even if the next five years for you would've been, in
terms of the contents, modestly bad--perhaps the value of at least
being alive at all outweighs it, so it still would've been better for
you to be alive. But if the contents get bad enough, then you'd be
better off dead.</p>

<p>Notice that on the modest view, if we ask ourselves, would it have
been good to be immortal? the answer's going to depend on not just
whether we accept Bernard Williams' claim that immortality would be bad
for you, because we now realize that what Williams was talking about
was the <i>contents</i> of an immortal life. And that's no longer an
adequate view, or at least it's no longer a complete story, if we are
valuable container theorists. We could say--you could imagine somebody
saying, "Oh yes, you're right, Williams, the contents get negative, but
that's still outweighed by the mere fact that you're alive. So on
balance, being immortal is a good thing." Whether that's right or not
depends on just how bad would it be to be immortal. Because, of course,
if you're a modest, if you accept the modest version of the valuable
container theory, then if the contents get bad <i>enough</i>, that can
outweigh the positive value of life.</p>

<p>Against that, fans of the fantastic valuable container theory can
say, it doesn't really matter whether Williams is right. Even if being
immortal would become horrendously boring and tedious or worse, it
doesn't matter. The value of being alive per se outweighs that. So
you're always better off being alive. So more life would always be
better, no matter how horrible the contents might be. So being immortal
really would be a <i>good</i> thing for you. Death <i>always</i> is a
bad thing. That's what you can say if you accept the fantastic
container theory. I don't find the fantastic container theory myself--I
don't find it particularly attractive. I'm inclined to think not only
that--not only that the contents of life would be bad, eventually, for
all of us if we were immortal--but that it would be bad enough to
outweigh whatever value, whatever positive value being alive per se may
have for us. So, I'm inclined to think, eventually immortality would
always be bad overall.</p>

<p>But let me remind you that saying that does not rule out the
possibility of consistently going on to say that even though it's a
good thing that we die, because eventually immortality would be
horrible--for all that, death could still come <i>too soon</i>. It
could still be the case that we die before life has turned bad. We die
while it's still the case that living another ten years or twenty
years--or for that matter five hundred years--would still or could
still have been good for us. It's compatible with thinking that
immortality would be bad to think that in fact death comes too
soon.</p>

<p>But of course, we now have a return of the division between
moderates, optimists and pessimists. You might say, optimists are
those--now in this more chastened version of optimism, optimists say,
"Even if immortality would be bad eventually after a million years or
ten million years or what have you, the next chunk of life would've
been good for all of us." So that death--they're optimists in this
strange sense, if they think life would've been good, which means of
course that <i>that</i> we die is bad for us. Because we all die too
soon. That's what the optimists might say. Against that, the pessimists
might say, "Boy, death comes not a moment too soon for any of us. The
next chunk of life is always not worth having, always worse than
nothing." And in between these two extremes are the moderates, who say,
"For some of us, death comes too soon. For some of us, death does not
come too soon."</p>

<p>There's a quote I want to read. It's actually out of place now. I
should have read it a lecture or two ago when I started talking about
immortality, but I misplaced it. So, I found it this morning. So before
I just leave the subject of immortality, let me conclude with some
words of wisdom from a former Miss USA contestant. She was asked the
question, "Would you want to live forever?" And she responded, "I would
not live forever, because we should not live forever. Because if we
were supposed to live forever, then we would live forever. But we
cannot live forever, which is why I would not live forever." Isn't that
nice? All right.</p>

<p>So I've been talking for, actually now a couple of weeks I suppose,
about the central badness of death. Why is it that death is bad for me?
And the answer I propose is the deprivation account. The central bad
thing about the fact that I'm going to die is the fact that because
I'll be dead I'll be deprived of the good things in life. And we've now
seen that that's a bit crude, right? We have to not talk--just talk
about the good things in the life, but the good of life itself, and we
have to notice that perhaps on certain views, for certain cases, it's
not really the case that when I die I'm being deprived of a good life.
Because the next chunk, or perhaps from there on out, it would've been
bad. But still, details and complications of the sort we've been
considering aside, the fundamental badness of death is that it deprives
me of life worth having.</p>

<p>But although I've been at pains to say this is the
<i>fundamental</i> bad thing about death, I think it's arguable that--I
think one could make the case that this isn't the only bad thing about
death, even if we're focusing on why is death bad for me? There are
<i>other</i> features of death, as we experience it, that are separable
from the deprivation account, that at least add to the way that death
occurs for us, where we then have to ask the question, does this add to
the badness of death? Or conceivably for some of these things, perhaps
it mitigates it; it minimizes it in one way or another.</p>

<p>So, what I want to do is take at least a couple of minutes and
pursue some of these extra features as well. Here's an example. It's
not merely the fact--it's not merely true that you're going to die.
It's <i>inevitable</i> that you're going to die. There's no avoiding
the fact that you're going to die. I mean look, you're all going to
college, but it wasn't inevitable that you go to college. Had you
chosen not to, you could've avoided going to college. But it doesn't
matter what you choose, you can't avoid dying. So it's not just merely
the case that in fact we are all going to die; it's a <i>necessary</i>
truth that we're all going to die. So we might ask, what about this
inevitability of death? Does that make things worse? And here I want to
distinguish between the individual question about the inevitability of
death, and the universal question.</p>

<p>So just start by thinking about the fact that it's unavoidable that
<i>you're</i> going to die. Does the unavoidability of death make it
better or worse? And the interesting thing is, I think you can see--you
can get a feel for both possible answers here. On the one hand, you can
imagine somebody who says, "Look, it's bad enough that I'm going to
die, but the fact that there's nothing I could do about it just makes
it worse. It's like adding insult to injury that I'm powerless in the
face of death. I cannot escape the Grim Reaper. This sheer
powerlessness about this central fact about the nature of my existence
is an extra insult added to the injury."</p>

<p>Against that, however, there are those people who'd want to say,
"No. Actually, the inevitability of my death <i>reduces</i> the
badness." You all know the expression, "Don't cry over spilt milk."
Right? That what's done is done. You can't change it. What you can't
change, loses--when you focus on the fact that you can't change it, it
loses some of its grip to upset you. Well, if that's right, and if we
then realize that there's nothing I can do about the fact that I'm
going to die, then perhaps some of the sting, some of the bite, is
eliminated. It's as though you try--try getting upset about the fact
that two plus two equals four. Try feeling upset at your powerlessness
to change the fact that two plus two equals four. Suppose you wanted
two plus two to equal five. Can you work up anger and regret and dismay
over that? Well, most of us, of course, can't. Because when we see that
something is just necessary, we--it reduces the sting of it.</p>

<p>The philosopher Spinoza thought that if we could only recognize the
fact, what he at least took to be the fact, that everything that
happens in life is necessary, then we'd get a kind of emotional
distance from it; it would no longer upset us. We could no longer be
disappointed, because to be disappointed in something presupposes that
it could've been some other way. And Spinoza thought if you see that it
couldn't go any other way, then you can't be sad about it. Well, if we
see that our death is inevitable and we really internalize that fact,
perhaps that would reduce the badness of it.</p>

<p>Well, maybe that's right, but going back to the firsthand, I don't
know how many of you have read Dostoyevsky's short novel <i>The
Underground Man</i>. The Underground Man is upset about--if I remember
correctly--he's upset about the fact that two plus two equals four and
there's nothing that he can do about it. So he curses existence, curses
God at having made him so impotent that he can't change the fact that
two plus two equals four. And another philosopher, Descartes, in
thinking about God's omnipotence, thought that it wouldn't be good
enough if God as omnipotent couldn't change the facts of mathematics.
And so he imagines that God, as omnipotent, could've made two plus two
equals five. And so it's a kind of--;So, it is indeed a fact of our
powerlessness that we're stuck with the necessities. God isn't stuck
with them. And so Dostoyevsky takes that thought and runs with it and
says, "Yeah. It doesn't help to say that it's inevitable. It makes it
worse." Well, there's both sides. And as I say, I myself, in different
moods, get pulled in both ways.</p>

<p>What about the fact that not only is it inevitable that I'm going to
die, it's inevitable that we're <i>all</i> going to die. Does the
<i>universality</i> of death make things better or worse? And again,
you can sort of feel the pull both ways. On the one hand you say, it's
bad that I'm going to die, but I'm not a <i>monster</i>. It makes me
feel even <i>worse</i> that everybody else is stuck dying--or perhaps
we should say dying too soon in light of our discussion about
immortality. It's a pity that most everybody, or perhaps everybody,
dies too soon. That makes it even worse.</p>

<p>On the other hand, you know, let's be honest here, we also know the
expression, "Misery loves company." And there's at least some comfort
to be had, isn't there, in the realization that this thing isn't just
true for me. It's not like the universe has singled me out for the
deprivation of dying too soon. It's something that it does to
everybody. So perhaps there's some comfort in the inevitability of
death.</p>

<p>Well, here's a different aspect of death worth thinking about. What
about the <i>variability</i> of death? After all, it's not just the
case that we all die. And I'll stop saying die too soon. Let's just
suppose we understand that clause to be implied in what I'm saying.
It's not just the case that we all die. There's a great deal of
<i>variation</i> in how much life we get. Some of us make it to the
ripe old age of 80, 90 a 100 or more. Others of us die at 20, or 15, or
10, or younger.</p>

<p>Even if death were inevitable, it wouldn't have to come in
different-sized packages. That is, it wouldn't have to have
variability. We could imagine a world in which everybody
dies--everybody dies at the age of a hundred. Does it make things worse
or better that there's this kind of variability? From the moral point
of view, I suppose, it's fairly straightforward to suggest it makes
things worse. After all, most of us are inclined to think that
inequality is morally objectionable. It's bad that, through no fault of
their own, some people are poor and other people are rich. If
inequality is morally objectionable, then it's very likely we're going
to think it's morally horrendous that there's this crucial inequality:
some of us die a the age of 5 while others get to live to 90.</p>

<p>But in keeping with the focus of our discussion about the badness of
death, I want to put aside the moral question and think about how good
or bad for <i>me</i> is it that there's variability in death? Well, we
might say, let's look at it from two basic perspectives, those who get
less than the average lifespan and those who get more than the average
lifespan. From the point of view of somebody who gets <i>less</i>, this
is obviously a bad thing. It's bad enough that I'm going to die too
soon. I said I wasn't going to keep saying that remark, and here I am
saying it anyway. It's bad enough that I'm going to die. But what's
even worse is I'm going to get even less than the average amount of
life. That's clearly an extra-bad. But we might then wonder, for every
person who gets less than the average amount of life--suppose we take
the median, take the amount of life that's exactly, 50 percent of the
people get more, 50 percent of the people get less. For every person
who has less than the median amount of life, there's another person who
has <i>more</i> than the median amount of life. That person gets to
say, hey. Well, you know, it's a pity that I'm going to die or die too
soon, but at least I'm getting more than the average. That's a
plus.</p>

<p>So perhaps these two aspects balance themselves out. There are
people who are basically screwed by the fact that they get less than
the average amount and people who are benefited by getting more than
the average amount. So perhaps in terms of the individual badness of
death that's a wash. Maybe. Except it seems to me it's a further fact
about human psychology that we care more about being short-changed than
we do about being, as we might put it, overcompensated. I rather
suspect that people who have less than the average of something, it
hurts them more than it benefits the people who have more than the
average of something. And if that's right--and that seems likely to be
the case, especially for something like death--the extra bad of the
fact that there's variability and so some people get less than
average--that extra bad, I suspect, outweighs the extra benefit of some
people having more than average.</p>

<p>Well, let's consider a different feature. We've had inevitability;
we had variability. What about <i>unpredictability</i>? Not only is it
inevitable that you're going to die; not only do some people live
longer than others, you don't know how much more time you've got. Now,
you might think, well, didn't we already discuss that when we started
thinking about variability? But in fact, logically speaking at least,
variability, although it's a requirement for unpredictability, doesn't
guarantee unpredictability. You could have variability with complete
predictability. Imagine that when everybody's born, on their wrist
everybody's born with a natural birthmark that indicates the precise
year, day, and time in which they're going to die. We could imagine a
world like this where it's inevitable; everybody's got some date on it.
And for that matter, there could still be variability. Some people live
80 years, some people live 20 years. But there's no unpredictability.
Because of the birthmark, everybody knows exactly how much longer
they've got.</p>

<p>Well, so in our world we don't have that. In our world, not only do
we have variability, we've got unpredictability. Does that make things
better? Or does that make things worse? Would it be better to know when
you were going to die? Well, one way in which unpredictability at least
has the potential of making things worse is this. Because you don't
know how much more time you've got--You can make a guess based on
statistics, but as we saw, there's wild unpredictability. You can
think, look, "the average lifespan in the United States is whatever it
is, 82 years. So I probably have, you guys are in your 20s--you know
20--roughly another 60 years are going." And as you're busy calculating
all this, you're walking across Chapel Street and you get hit by a
truck and you die. Right? Because of unpredictability, you can't really
know. And because you can't really know, it's difficult to make the
right kinds of plans.</p>

<p>And in particular, it's hard to know how to pace yourself. You
decide to go off to medical school, become a doctor. And so not only do
you put the time into college, you put the time into medical school,
and you put the time into your residency and you put your time into
your internship. And that's a very long commitment. It's a long-term
plan, which can go wrong if you get sick and die in your early 20s.
Well, that's a rather dramatic example, but the same sort of thing in
principle can happen to all of us. You make a life plan, what you want
to accomplish in your life, and well, obviously enough, some of us will
die too soon, not just in terms of, "oh, well, life still could've had
good things," but too soon in terms of you didn't get where you wanted
to get in terms of your life plan. If only you'd known you were only
going to have 20 more years instead of 50 more years, you would've
picked a different kind of life for yourself. The unpredictability
makes it worse.</p>

<p>And indeed, less obviously, it can work the other way as well. You
make a life plan, and then, you know, you don't die yet. You continue
to stick around, and then your life has this feeling of--at least we
can imagine this happening--being sort of anticlimactic. You peaked too
soon. If only you'd known you had another 50 years, that you weren't
going to die young--or James Dean, going to burn out fast and die
young--if only you'd realized you were going to live to the ripe old
age of 97, you would have picked a different life for yourself.</p>

<p>Now, in thinking about these points, in effect I'm suggesting that
the value of your life--so ,we previously were talking about different
theories of well-being and what makes for the best kind of life. Here
we have yet another kind of feature that we haven't talked about. We
might think of it as, the overall shape of your life matters. What we
could also call "the narrative arc of your life" matters.</p>

<p>Let me illustrate the point with some very, very simple graphs.
These are not meant to be realistic, but they'll give you the idea. So,
we all know the Horatio Alger story right? Somebody starts out poor and
makes his way through hard work and dedication and effort to riches and
success. Rags to riches--that's a wonderful, inspiring life.</p>

<p>Let's draw the graph of that life. So here's how well off you are,
here is time, and you start with nothing and you end up incredibly well
off. That's a great life. That's the Horatio Alger life--H.A. Great
life. All right. Now, consider the following story. Here are the axes
again. Instead of the rags to riches life, imagine the riches to rags
life. Starts off with everything, ends up with nothing. That's the
Algers Horatio story. It's the reverse. [See Figure 20.1] Now, I doubt
if there's anybody here who is indifferent between the choices,
indifferent with regard to the choice between these two lives. I
imagine that everybody here prefers this life.</p>

<p>But notice that in terms of the contents of the life, at least the
local contents, it's a bit hard to see why that would be the case,
right? We've got equal periods of suffering and doing slightly better
and slightly better and slightly better--equal periods of success and
suffering. For every bad period here there's a corresponding bad period
here. For every good period here there's a corresponding good period
here. In terms of the contents of your life, being crude but you see
the point, in terms of the contents of your life--equally good. And
even if we accept the valuable container theory, and so we say, "Hah,
you know, being alive per se is worth something as well." Well, you're
alive for equal periods of time. So the extra points get added either
way.</p>

<p>You might say, look, if we're not indifferent between these two
lives, that's because we think the overall shape of your life matters
as well. The narrative arc, as I put it. The story "bad to good" is the
kind of story we want for ourselves, while the story "good to bad" is
the kind of story we don't want for ourselves. Interesting question.
Why is that? And this of course should remind us of the puzzle about
Lucretius. Why do we care more about future non-existence than past
non-existence? When the bad is behind us, that seems less bothersome
than when the bad is in front of us.</p>

<p>You may remember the story from Derek Parfit about having the
painful operation. Was it going to be in the future or did it take
place earlier today? You don't remember. We're not indifferent. We want
the bad behind us, not the bad in front of us. So, whatever the
explanation is, we care about the overall shape and trajectory of our
life.</p>

<p>Now, that being the case, we have to worry then that because of the
unpredictability of death that our lives may not have the ideal shape.
A lot of us might feel that a life like this, where we peak but then we
stick around--you know, isn't--can at least fail to be as desirable in
which we end with a bang. [See Figure 20.2] If you start thinking about
narrative arcs--imagine a novel, right? It's one thing to have--it's
not to say that the best--if you want your life to be like the plot of
a great story, it's not as though you think, "All right, the dénouement
must occur at the very last page." It's okay to stick around for a
while, but if the high point of the story occurs in chapter 2 and then
there are another 67 chapters after that, you think, this was not a
well-constructed novel.</p>

<p>And insofar as we care about the overall shape of our lives, we
might worry about wanting it to have the right shape overall. Where and
when do you want to peak, as it were, in terms of your accomplishments?
Well, that matters to us, but the trouble is, without predictability
you don't know where to put the peak. Because if you try to aim for
peaking later, you might not make it to that. If you put it too soon,
you might stick around for longer than that, and then the peak has come
too soon. All of this suggests then that the unpredictability of our
death adds an extra negative element. It makes it harder to plan what
the best way to live my life would be. And from that perspective it
looks as though it would be better to know how much time you've got
left. But then we have to ask--so I'll throw the question out and we'll
call it a day, start with this next time--then we have to ask, would it
really be better to know? Would you want the birthmark? Would you want
to know exactly how much time you've got left? All Right. See you next
time.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
