
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 24 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">April 19, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Last time, we talked about how you
should live your life, in light of the fact of our--your mortality. How
does the fact that we will die--how should that affect the way that we
live? What we're going to turn to now, our final topic for the
semester, is the flip side. The fact of our mortality raises the
question as to whether or not we should put an end to our life.
Strictly speaking, I suppose it's not the fact that we're mortal, per
se, it's one of those extra features of death that I've discussed
previously, the variability of death. And more particularly still, the
fact that we can control how long we live. We face the possibility of
ending our life earlier than it would end otherwise. That's suicide, of
course.</p>

<p>And so our final topic is, under what circumstances, if any, does
suicide make sense? Under what circumstances, if any, is it an
appropriate thing to do? Now, it's a fairly widespread feature of our
culture that suicide is looked upon with such a mixture of disdain,
fear, finding it offensive, that it's very hard, often, to think
clearly and discuss the topic clearly. Most people think it's either
that you've got to be crazy to kill yourself. The very fact that you
are contemplating suicide is evidence that you're crazy. And if you're
not crazy, then it shows that you're immoral. Suicide is clearly never,
never right, the right thing to do.</p>

<p>So, what I want to propose is that we take some time and look at the
questions on both sides with a fair bit of care. And the very first
thing to do, I think, in thinking about the topic of suicide, is to
distinguish questions of rationality from questions of morality. That
is, I want us to take a look at, initially, the question, under what
circumstances, if ever, would suicide be the rational thing to do? And
then later turn to the question, when, if ever, would suicide be a
morally legitimate or a morally permissible or morally acceptable thing
to do?</p>

<p>In posing this distinction, I'm obviously presupposing that these
questions can come apart, or at least they need to be examined
separately. Questions of rationality on the one hand, and questions of
morality on the other. These are both questions about oughts, as we
might put it. They're evaluative questions. But at least most people
are inclined to think that we are drawing on different evaluative
standards when we raise the one set of questions, as opposed to when we
raise the other.</p>

<p>In many cases, no doubt, rationality and morality go hand in hand.
And there are philosophical views about the nature of rationality and
the nature of morality, according to which they always go hand in hand.
But many of us are inclined to think that they can come apart. Take,
for example, given the season of the year that it is, consider doing
your income taxes or, more particularly still, cheating on your income
taxes. The rate at which income tax forms get audited is very, very
slight. And so--and the fines tend to not be especially egregious, even
if you do get caught. So that from a rational point of view, many of us
might think it might well be a <i>rational</i> decision to cheat.
You're not likely to get caught. Even if you do get caught, how bad's
the fine anyway? But even if we were to agree that it was rational to
cheat, most of us would then immediately want to follow that remark up
by pointing out that doesn't at all mean that it's morally acceptable
to cheat on your income tax. There's a case perhaps where you're
morally required to do something that you're not rationally required to
do.</p>

<p>Or, take a choice from the other point of view. There you are,
trying to decide between--there you are, trying to decide between your
various choices of college. And you've gotten into Yale on the one
hand, and perhaps some crummy school, your second-rate backup school,
on the other. And you're trying to decide what to do there. Well, you
might think to yourself, morally I have no obligations here. There's no
particular obligation, moral requirement, to go to the better school
rather than the worse school. But for all that, it would be
<i>irrational</i> of me, perhaps, to go to the worse school. So there's
a case where there's no moral requirement, but there's a rational
requirement.</p>

<p>Again, we could debate the details of the two examples, but the
point's just to show that, in principle at least, on the face of it,
these two questions can come apart. Sometimes it's rationally
acceptable to do something, but it's immoral. Sometimes it's morally
acceptable to do something, but it's irrational. So in thinking about
suicide, we need to pose the two questions, one after the other. So,
let's start with the question about the <i>rationality</i> of suicide.
When, if ever, is suicide a rational decision to make?</p>

<p>Now, once again, the first thing I want to do in thinking about the
rationality of suicide is to distinguish two different issues, or two
different questions. The first question is going to be this. When, if
ever, would it be true that you are better off dead? Could it be the
case that your life is going so badly that you'd be better off dead?
Second question, assuming that the answer to the first question is,
under such and such circumstances, you would be better off dead, we
still have to ask, could it ever be rational for you to <i>trust</i>
your judgment that this is one of those cases in which you're better
off dead? Could it ever be rational for you to kill yourself?
Conceivably, the answer to the second might be no.</p>

<p>Jude, would you please turn off the camera for a moment? Are you
ready? Okay. [speaking to the cameraman]</p>

<p>All right. So, the question was this. It's conceivable you might
have a thought like the following. In those circumstances in which life
has gotten so horrible that you'd be better off dead, you can't think
clearly. And the very fact that you can't think clearly would entail
that you shouldn't trust your judgment that you are in one of those
cases. Whether that's a good argument or not is something we'll have to
turn to later. But it's because of the possibility of that argument
that I wanted to distinguish the initial question, could it be true
that you're better off dead? from the secondary question, even if it
could be true that you're better off dead, could it ever be a
reasonable or rational decision for you to believe that you're in one
of those situations? Unless we've got the two things in place, it
doesn't seem likely that it's ever going to be rational to commit
suicide.</p>

<p>So, the very first topic we have to look at is, could it ever be
true that you'd be better off dead? And immediately, there's a kind of
logical worry that may occur to some of you, certainly has been raised
by various philosophers. And that's to say that the very judgment, the
very claim, that Jones would be better off dead can't make any sense.
On the assumption that, look, in order to make comparisons--better off,
worse off; here he is in such and such a situation; he'd be better off
in that other situation--you've got to be able to talk about, on the
one hand, what condition or state the person is <i>before</i> and what
condition or state the person would be in <i>afterwards</i>, if they
were to make that choice. Call this the two-state requirement.</p>

<p>Normally, when we make judgments about whether something would leave
you better off or worse off, we satisfy the two-state requirement.
You're trying to decide whether or not to lose some weight. And you
think, well, here's how well off I am now, being overweight. Here's how
well off I would be later, if I were to lose that weight. I can compare
the two states, say the second state's better than the first state.
That's what makes it true that I'd be better off. Trying to decide
whether or not to marry the person or break up with the person or pick
this career or change careers. You've got the state you're in and you
compare it to the state you <i>would</i> be in. You compare the two
states. That's what allows us to say, "Yeah, I'd be better off" or "No,
I'd be worse off."</p>

<p>But when we're talking about cases of suicide, cases where, well,
here I am now, the <i>before</i> state requirement's in place, but if
we contrast that with the <i>after</i> state requirement, well, that
part's not met, right? When you--On the assumption that death is the
end, that you won't exist, nonexistence isn't a <i>state</i> that you
will be in. It's not a <i>condition</i> of you, because states and
conditions presuppose existence. We can talk about are you happy? Are
you sad? Are you bored? Are you excited? All of those things presuppose
your existence. Even are you sleeping? is a state or condition you can
be in, because you exist. But if I kill myself, I won't exist. There is
no second state to compare. So, how could we possibly say, the
objection goes, how could we possibly say that I'd be better off dead?
That seems to presuppose that there's a second state that we can
compare to my actual state. Since there isn't one, the judgment, I'd be
better off dead, can't even get off the ground. It's got a logical
mistake built right into it. Well, that's the objection. And, as I say,
there are a number of philosophers who are drawn to it. Maybe some of
you are drawn to it as well.</p>

<p>It seems to me that it's mistaken. Consider what we wanted to say
when we talked about the deprivation account, the central account of
what's bad about death. For most of us, dying would be bad, because it
would deprive us of the good things in life that we would get, if only
we didn't die. That seemed like a natural thing to say. It seemed like
an appropriate thing to say. Of course, we might ask, if we believe in
the two-state requirement, how <i>could</i> we have said that? After
all, given the two-state requirement, to say that death is bad for me,
I'd be better off staying alive. If we believe in the two-state
requirement, we've got to say, Oh, so had I died, I would have been in
some state that I could compare to my current state and say that it's
worse. But, of course, death isn't a state. So, the two-state
requirement's not met.</p>

<p>Well, we might say this should give us some pause. If the two-state
requirement--It would be one thing if all that the two-state
requirement said was, you know, we can't ever say we'd be better off
dead. But it turns out the two-state requirement's got more
implications than that. It's got the implication that you can't even
say you're better off staying <i>alive</i>. And that's very, very hard
to believe.</p>

<p>Imagine that you've got some happy person, some incredibly happy
person with a wonderful life filled with whatever goods you think are
worth having in life--love and accomplishment and knowledge and
whatever it is. He's walking across the street and he's about to get
hit by a truck. And so, at some risk to yourself, you leap into the
way, pushing him out of the way, saving his life. And happily, you
don't get hurt either. He looks up, realizes he was this close from
death and he says, "Thank you. Thank you for saving my life."</p>

<p>And now what you have to say is, "I'm afraid you're rather confused.
Because to say ‘thank you' for my saving your life is to presuppose
I've benefited you in some way. To presuppose I've benefited you in
some way is to assume that you're--it's a good thing that your life has
continued. But, you see, given the two-state requirement, we can't say
it's a good thing that your life continued, because the two-state
requirement says we can only make that kind of remark when there's a
before state and an after state. And the after state would have been
nonexistence. So, you see, you're really rather philosophically
confused in thinking that I've done you some sort of favor by saving
your life."</p>

<p>I can't take that argument seriously. It seems to me that--and I
hope that none of you would take it seriously, either. <i>Of
course</i>, you are doing somebody a favor when you save their life,
given the assumption that their life has been and would continue to be
wonderful. And what that shows is not that so nonexistence really is a
kind of spooky, super thin state or condition. No, of course it isn't.
Nonexistence is nonexistence. It's no kind of condition or state at
all. What it shows is the two-state requirement isn't a genuine
requirement on these sorts of evaluations. We don't have to say that if
you had died--when you point to the person whose life you saved, we
don't have to say that had you died, you would have been in some
inferior state. We simply have to say the life you would have had, had
I saved you and indeed will have, given that I have saved you, is a
great life. Since it's good, to lose it would be bad. Since losing it
would be bad, saving it for you is benefiting you. It's doing you a
favor. Two-state requirement says otherwise. Two-state requirement's
got to go.</p>

<p>But, having gotten rid of it, we can say the same thing in principle
on the other side. Imagine there was somebody whose life was horrible,
full of pain and suffering and misery. Now, whether there could be such
a person, again, that's a question we'll turn to in a second. But if
there were such a person, then we can say, for their life to continue
isn't good for them; it's bad for them. Their life is full of misery
and suffering and frustration and disappointment. And the more and more
of that, the worse and worse the life is. To lead a life of 100 years,
where every moment is torture and pain, is worse than a life of 30
years, where every moment is torture and pain. So, if you had such a
person, for their life to go longer would be bad. In which case, for
their life to be going shorter, would be better for them.</p>

<p>And that's all we mean when we say they'd be better off dead. Not
that there's some spooky super thin and hard to describe condition that
they'd be in if they were dead. But simply, we look back at the two
possible lives they could have. Just with the person whose life we
saved. The first person, we compare the great life that lasts 100 years
versus the great life that only lasts 20 years because you didn't save
their life. We say, oh, the life of 100 years, better life. And so,
saving their life is a good thing for them. Similarly, we compare the
lives of misery, the long life versus the short life of misery. And we
say, oh, the long life of misery is a worse life to have than the short
life of misery. And that being the case, we simply can say you'd be
better off dead. Not that you'd be in some condition that's a good one.
It's simply, you'd <i>avoid</i> this condition, which is a bad one. And
if the two-state requirement says otherwise, so much the worse for the
two state requirement.</p>

<p>All right. So this is by way of the logical worry, that we can't
even get off the ground in talking about the possibility that you'd be
better off dead. I think if we believe in the two-state requirement,
maybe we'd have to say that. But the cost of accepting the two-state
requirement is so implausible, that the person's dying of a heart
attack and you perform CPR. Instead of saying "Thank you," they say,
"Oh, I'm really no better off than I would have been if I died, even
though I'm having a wonderful life." The two-state requirement's just
so implausible, we should let it go.</p>

<p>Now, having done that, of course, doesn't yet tell us that it could,
in fact, be the case that somebody's life could be so bad that they'd
be better off dead, that the existence that they've got is worse than
not existing at all. All we've done so far is leave open the door; open
the door to the possibility of saying that coherently. But that doesn't
mean it's true. Whether or not there could be such lives depends on
your view about what's the correct account of well-being. What is it
that goes into making somebody's life worthwhile?</p>

<p>Now, as we've seen previously, this is a controversial topic. People
disagree about the ingredients of the best kind of life. And because of
these differences, we're going to get philosophical differences of
opinion with regard to whether or not a life could be so bad that it
would be better for it to come to an end.</p>

<p>I'm not going to try to rehearse all the possible theories there
are. Or, for that matter, even all the theories that we've talked about
previously. But to give you an illustration of how it could be true,
imagine, go back to our simplest theory of well-being--hedonism,
according to which your quality of life is a matter of adding up all
the pleasure and subtracting all the pain. And we need to take into
account how long the pleasures and the pains last and how intense the
pleasures and the pains are. But still, we add up the total amount of
pleasure, add up the total amount of pain, subtract the pain from the
pleasure and look to see what our grand total is. If it's positive,
your life's worth living. And the greater the number, the greater the
positive number, the more your life is worth living.</p>

<p>If it's negative though, if your life is filled with pain and
suffering, or at least so much pain and suffering that it outweighs
whatever pleasures you may have in your life, so that your balance is a
negative one, then your life's not worth living. Having that go longer
and longer is just more and more negative balance. That's a life that's
bad for you to have and you'd be better off not having it. You'd be
better off having your life come to an end. You'd be better off dead.
And, of course, the more and more negative the grand total is, the
worse your life is. And so the more it's true that you'd be better off
dead. Well, that's what hedonism says.</p>

<p>If we're not hedonists, and of course, previously I've argued that
we shouldn't be hedonists, then we need a more complicated theory of
the good. We need to throw in other things, perhaps, certain external
goods. It's not just a matter of getting the insides right--the
pleasure and the pain and the other mental states--there are various
facts about your objective hookup with the rest of the world. Are you
really climbing Mount Everest? Are you really accomplishing things? Do
people really love you, and so forth and so on? Whatever your list is
of those other objective goods--well you'll probably also want to have
a list of other objective bads, besides pain. But still, the same basic
idea is going to be in place. We're going to want to somehow add up all
of the various objective goods, add up all the various objective bads,
and see where the balance lies. Do the goods outweigh the bad? If the
goods outweigh the bad, that's great. Your life's worth living. But if
the bads outweigh the good, then your life is not worth living, or not
worth continuing.</p>

<p>Now, as we've noted before, there are philosophical theories which
go on to claim--pessimists, various versions of pessimistic views,
which say, for everybody in all circumstances, life is so bad that
they'd be better off dead. Life's so full of suffering and misery, that
whatever pleasures there are and other goods there may be in the life,
they get outweighed by the objective bads. There are philosophical
views like that, but I suppose the commonsense view is, well, even if
some lives may be so bad that the person is better off dead, that's not
true of all lives. It depends on the facts of the case.</p>

<p>So, let's focus on that possibility. Of course, even here, we still
have to return to another issue that we've considered before. Namely,
is life itself worth having? Is the very fact that you're alive itself
a good thing? These are the valuable container theories, which I've
previously contrasted with the neutral container theories. You'll
recall that according to the neutral container theories, in thinking
about the quality of someone's life, you just look at the contents.
Life itself is only a container, good or bad, depending on what it's
filled up with. But opposed to the neutral container theories, we had
valuable container theories which say the very fact that you're alive
adds some positive value above and beyond whatever's going on in your
life. Now, even the valuable container theories came in different
versions. There were more modest versions, where in principle, the
positive value of being alive could be outweighed if the contents got
bad enough. And we contrast that with fantastic container theories,
according to which being alive is so valuable, that it doesn't matter
how bad the contents get, the grand total is always a positive one.</p>

<p>Now look, if you accept a fantastic container theory, then pretty
clearly, it's never true that somebody could be better off dead.
Because no matter how bad the contents get, the fact that they're
alive, per se, is so valuable, it outweighs that subtotal, giving us a
positive grand total. So pretty clearly, from the perspective of
fantastic container theories, suicide will never be rational, because
it's never true that you're better off dead, because it's never true
that your life over all, taking everything that's relevant into
consideration, gives us a negative. Yeah, question.</p>

<p><b>Student:</b> [inaudible]</p>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> The question was, on the fantastic
container theories, what's so incredible about life itself? Are we
saying it's intrinsically valuable? And yes, the answer is: precisely.
The fans of the valuable container theories are saying being alive
itself is valuable. You may recall that I previously said although
people talk that way, they probably don't actually mean it, right? If
you told them, okay, you can be alive as a blade of grass, they
wouldn't say, "Oh, wouldn't that be wonderful? That's worth having."
Most fans of the claim that being alive, per se, is valuable don't
really mean life <i>per se</i>. They mean something more like life as a
person. Being the kind of entity who can think and plan, even if your
plans go wrong, at least you were a person able to experience things,
know things, and so forth.</p>

<p>Of course, if that's the reason for accepting the fantastic
container theory, then we might wonder what should we say about those
cases where the P-functioning has decayed and the person is no longer
able to continue as a person, but perhaps can still feel pain? In that
case, perhaps, life could cease to be worth living. Though whether or
not we should describe it in that way also depends on these complicated
issues that we've discussed previously, about would that still be you?
Would you still exist? Would you still be alive under those
circumstances? So, the basic idea behind valuable container theories is
that life, or the life of a person, or something like that, has
intrinsic value above and beyond the question of what's going on within
your life.</p>

<p>If we accept the fantastic container theory, maybe nobody's life is
ever so bad, grand total. Because--so that suicide would be the
rational thing to do--because the value of life, per se, is so
incredible that it outweighs the contents. It <i>has</i> to outweigh
the contents. That's a philosophical view at the opposite end of the
pessimists. The pessimist said, "As a matter of philosophical
reflection, we can see that everybody's life is worse than nothing."
The fantastic container fans are saying, "As a matter of philosophical
reflection, we can see that everybody's life is better than
nothing."</p>

<p>Most of us, I imagine, find ourselves somewhere in between. Either
we believe in the neutral container theory and think it's a contingent
matter whether the contents are sufficiently good or bad. Or, we may
accept the modest version of the valuable container theory. On that
theory, of course, life has some intrinsic value, but it's got a finite
intrinsic value. And in principle, even <i>that</i> could be outweighed
if the contents get bad enough. And so again, it would be an empirical
question. We have to take a look and see, in which cases do the
contents get bad enough?</p>

<p>Now, I guess I'm one of these people in the middle. I'm inclined to
think it's not true that everybody's life is worse than nothing. Nor is
it true that everybody's life is better than nothing. It varies from
person to person. And indeed, not just--since we're thinking about
suicide, we're not talking about their life as a whole, but really,
what does life promise from here on out? Sadly enough, sad to say, it
seems to me there are cases, and probably most of us are familiar with
cases, where the correct description, given the--your favorite theory
of well-being--is going to be that for <i>this</i> person, here on out,
what life has to offer is sufficiently bad, so that the contents are
sufficiently negative as to outweigh whatever value life itself might
have.</p>

<p>We could imagine somebody in the terminal stages of some illness,
where their cancer perhaps is causing them a great deal of pain. And
the pain is so bad that they can't really do much of anything else.
It's not as though they could continue working on their novel or
continue talking with the members of their family, because they're just
distracted by the pain and wishing it would come to an end. Horribly
enough, many degenerative diseases leave the person less and less
capable of doing the things that give life value. And the very
realization that you're in that situation and no longer able to spend
time doing things, or hanging out with your family, or talking with
them, or whatever it is may, itself, be a source of more frustration
and pain.</p>

<p>There are medical conditions where, horribly enough, infants get
born where they're just in continual pain and they never develop
cognitively. Their brain doesn't develop and then they die. And you
look at these lives and you say these are lives--I want to say, these
are lives that were not worth having. These children would have been
better off never having been born at all, certainly not any kind of
favor for them to continue their lives.</p>

<p>Well, let's focus on some case like the terminal patient. A person's
got a disease--at least, that would be a nice easy example. Not easy to
live through, but easy philosophically. Easy example to think
about--some terminally ill patient whose disease is getting worse and
worse. And so, there are fewer and fewer of the good things in life
that the future holds for them. Instead, what the future holds is more
and more pain, suffering, incapacity, and frustration. When it gets bad
enough, it seems to me, in some of those cases the person can correctly
say, or we, at least, can correctly say of them, they'd be better off
dead.</p>

<p>All right. Let me try to draw some examples. Again, we're bracketing
the question: Can the person think clearly about their case? That'll
come later. Let's just try to talk about when would suicide make sense?
When would it be sort of a rational thing to do to end your life? A
couple of different cases. I'm going to draw graphs. We'll let the
x-axis represent time. And the y-axis represents how good or bad your
life is at that time. For those of us who are fans of the neutral
container theory, the thing to say is this represents the overall
goodness of your contents or the overall badness of your contents. The
higher up, the better the contents. The lower down, the worse the
contents. For those who are fans of the modest container theory, this
represents the grand balance. So it's contents plus the extra bit you
get from being alive. But of course, if you're a fan of the modest
container theory, then even if the contents are negative, the grand
balance might still be positive. But this represents the overall bottom
line, whether you accept the neutral container theory or the modest
container theory.</p>

<p>So, here's an example of what a life might look like. It's going
along pretty well and then things get worse. And things sort of
deteriorate. And let's suppose this point represents when you would die
of natural causes, natural death. [See Figure 24.1] So, towards the
end, life's not as great as it was when you were young and vigorous and
healthy and had all sorts of opportunities and accomplishments. But
still, till the very end, it stays positive.</p>

<p>Well, if that's what your lifeline would look like, pretty clearly,
suicide doesn't ever make any sense. In particular, you wouldn't want
to say oh, look, here's the place where I should kill myself, because
here is where things start to get worse. Yes, things are beginning to
get worse, but they never get so bad that you're better off dead. So,
suicide wouldn't make any sense at all. For suicide to make sense, it's
got to be the case that your life takes a turn for the worse. Not just
any old turn for the worse, but a turn so much for the worse, that for
some chunk of your life, your life is worse than nonexistence, the zero
line, the x-axis. [See Figure 24.2]</p>

<p>All right. Imagine that's what's happened. Here you are. You're
healthy, you're vigorous, you're accomplishing things, but you've got
some degenerative disease that's going to make things worse and worse.
Here's the period in which it's getting worse. And then after a while,
your existence is going to be worse than nothing. Here, we can at least
broach the question in an intelligible way. Might suicide make sense?
Suppose this is the point where the downturn begins. Should you kill
yourself at that stage? No. Because, after all, even though there's a
downturn, things are getting worse, there's still going to be another
period of life, another chunk of whatever it is--year, five years, six
months, whatever it is--where although life isn't as good as it had
been before, it's still better than nothing. Killing yourself at this
earlier moment is, we might say, premature. It's throwing away a chunk
of life that would still be worth having. It's not the right thing to
do. It doesn't make sense rationally.</p>

<p>Well, if not that moment, what about this moment? Here's the precise
point at which your life is becoming worse than nothing. For some
initial stretch of that, it won't be very much worse than nothing. But
still, overall, it's a negative. Up to that moment, your life was worth
living. From that moment on, your life is worse than nothing. If you've
got complete control over when to kill yourself, well, that would be
the time to do it.</p>

<p>Suppose you don't have complete control. It's straightforward enough
to say if your life is going to become worse than nothing and you have
complete control over when you kill yourself, it seems pretty plausible
to say the precise moment at which suicide would become rational would
be exactly that moment at which your life became not worth having. But
you might not have that kind of control. Suppose that what you've got
is a degenerative disease that is going to progressively strip you of
the ability to control your body. Still, your mind works for a much
longer time. And so, for a period of time, you're basically stuck in
your hospital bed being fed by somebody else. But perhaps you're able
to listen to your family talk about things, have books read to you.
Maybe you can engage in conversation, even though you can't use your
arms and so forth. Your life's still worth living, but the time's going
to come when your life won't be worth living. And at that point, you'll
no longer have the ability to kill yourself, because you won't have
control over your body.</p>

<p>It raises the question of--I'm sure you can all see at this point,
the question of suicide also turns into or comes up against, the
question about euthanasia, mercy killing. Under what circumstances is
it ever rational to ask somebody else to kill you? Under what
circumstances, if ever, is it morally legitimate to kill somebody
else?</p>

<p>But let's continue to focus on the case of suicide. Suppose you live
in a society which is so unenlightened as to have ruled out euthanasia.
In fact, you live in <i>our</i> society. And so, what we don't allow is
the possibility of somebody else coming along and killing you when the
time comes. So, you know the time is going to come at which you'd be
better off dead. But once you're there, once you're here, it's too
late. You can't do it. You won't have the ability to kill yourself, and
nobody else will be able to do it for you. In that case, killing
yourself earlier might still make sense.</p>

<p>Take this earlier point, for example. Here, if you kill yourself
now, you're throwing away some life that's worth living. But if this is
the last moment at which you're going to be able to kill yourself, it
might still make sense, rationally. Because your choice is not end it
here or end it there. We're assuming you don't have the possibility of
ending it here, at the precise moment at which life became no longer
worth having. Your choice, instead, is really just this. End it here
and throw away this whole last bit. Or not end it and then continue
until you die from the disease.</p>

<p>So, your question is only, what do I think about the value of this
last bit? On the whole, it's got a good part and it's god a bad part.
Is it better to have the good part and the bad part or better to have
none of it? And the answer, of course, is well, if the bad part's going
to continue long enough, it's better to have none of it. The bad
outweighs the good. So that the rational thing to do would be to decide
to end your life then, when you still can, rather than condemn yourself
to the long final stretch of life not worth living.</p>

<p>Well, what if the last time that you could actually control it was
way back here, for whatever reason it is. Here, you've got access to
the means of killing yourself and you won't have access later. Your
life's still going to be great for a very long time. And then,
inevitably, it'll be bad for a period of time. But at least if I've
drawn it right, if not, we can shorten this. I suppose death would come
here. Here's a case where if you don't kill yourself now, you're
condemning yourself to the whole rest of the story. But we might say,
"All right. Although, admittedly, the end of the story's going to be
negative, the only way to avoid that negative last part is to throw
away this very long great initial part." That doesn't make sense.
Although your life is now still going to be a mixture of good and bad,
and you wish there were a way to end it here, you don't have that
choice. It's throw away the good <i>and</i> the bad, or keep them both.
And in this story, obviously enough, the good is enough to outweigh the
bad. So, suicide doesn't make sense in that situation.</p>

<p>Here's a rather different way the story might go. Suppose your
life's going along really great and it takes a turn for the worse but
then is going to get better. So, it ends here with death by natural
causes. [See Figure 24.3] Could suicide make sense here? Does it make
sense to say, "Look, I'm going to kill myself in order to avoid the
downturn" or indeed, even if the recovery wasn't so long a recovery,
could suicide make sense here, because you're about to take this big
dip down and be condemned to most of the rest of your life being
significantly worse than it was before? No, suicide doesn't make sense
in this situation. Because even though what you're going to have during
this period is a life worse than the life you had before, the life
you've got here is still above the x-axis. It's still a life worth
living.</p>

<p>This point, I think, is probably crucial enough that it's worth
taking a moment to reflect on. The fact that your life is less good
than it had been, less good than indeed maybe all the lives around you
are having--all the people around you are having lives that are better
than yours--still doesn't mean that your life is so bad that you're
better off dead. It's easy to lose sight of that, right? Here we are
sliding down and all we see is the fact that we're moving down. It's
natural to get caught up in the thought "I'm better off dead," but it's
a mistake. You're not better off dead.</p>

<p>This situation, I suppose, is probably--I always worry when I
spend--when I end this class talking about suicide, because what's the
major cause of death among teenagers? Well, it's suicide. That's not
really so all that surprising, because teenagers are pretty healthy, as
people go. And so the--you're either going to get killed by an accident
or you're going to get killed by doing it to yourself. The kind of
mistake that I think leads most teenagers into killing themselves is
something like this. They've broken up with their girlfriend. They've
flunked out of school. They didn't get into medical school or law
school or what have you. And they think to themselves, "Oh, from here
on out, my life's not worth living." And the answer is, no, that's
actually, as an objective matter, probably not the case. Even if your
life would be less worth living than you had hoped it would be, it's
still better than nothing.</p>

<p>Of course, in the typical case, I suppose what it really looks like
is this. [See Figure 24.4] Small dip then continues wonderfully. But
you lose sight of all the good stuff yet to come while you're in the
middle of the dip. So, although I'm taking time now to talk about the
question, under what circumstances might suicide be a rationally
justified one? I should hasten to add the remark that I'm fairly
confident that for nobody in this class would suicide, in fact, be a
rational decision. Now, that doesn't mean it couldn't turn out to be a
rational decision later in your life, but that, very likely,
overwhelmingly likely, is not one <i>now</i>. Well, a couple other
cases that I still want to have us consider, but I think that's
probably enough for today, so we'll take it up there next time.</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
