
<div id="fileContents">
<h2><strong>Death:</strong> Lecture 26 Transcript</h2>

<table cellspacing="0" cellpadding="0" id="transcriptHeader" summary="transcript header">
<tbody>
<tr>
<td id="transcriptDate">April 26, 2007</td>
<td id="transcriptNav"><span id="forwardNav"><a href="README.md">&lt;&lt; back</a></span></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<p><b>Professor Shelly Kagan:</b> Last time we turned to questions
about the morality of suicide, and I started with two arguments that I
called quick and dirty arguments. I suppose it would have been fairer
to say that they were really theological arguments, or they were moral
arguments that used, in part, theological premises. I suggested that,
at least if we look at them in their quick and dirty versions, they
were inadequate, and if we're going to make a more careful argument
about the morality of suicide, we need to turn to a more systematic
view about the contents of morality. We need to look at suicide in
terms of the basic moral principles. Now, that's not something we've
got the chance to do in detail, but I think we can at least say enough
about a couple of basic approaches to the contents of morality, or the
basic moral rules, to get the beginnings of an understanding of what
might emerge about the morality of suicide if we were to do that more
carefully.</p>

<p>So, holding off on suicide for the moment, let's ask ourselves, what
is it that makes an action morally acceptable or morally forbidden?
This is, unsurprisingly, something that different moral theories
disagree about. But there's at least one factor or one feature that
all, or almost all, moral theories agree about. And that is that the
consequences of your action matter. That is, we might or might not
think that consequences are the <i>only</i> things that are morally
relevant when we think about the morality of your action, but surely it
is <i>one</i> thing that's morally relevant--what are the consequences
of your action going to be.</p>

<p>So, let's think about the morality of suicide with an eye towards
consequences, bearing in mind that since we're talking about a moral
point of view we need to take into account the consequences as they
affect everybody. Now, the person who, of course, is most affected by
suicide is, of course, the person who is killing themself. And at first
glance it might seem pretty clear that the consequences of suicide are
bad for that person. After all, the person was alive and now they're
dead, and we normally would take death to be a bad result.</p>

<p>If I were to tell you, "Oh, here's a switch on the wall. If you were
to flip the switch, a thousand people who would otherwise be alive
would end up dead," you would normally take that to be a pretty
compelling argument against flipping the switch. Why? Because the
result would be bad. Why? Because a thousand people would end up
dead.</p>

<p>Well, one person ending up dead isn't as bad as a thousand people
ending up dead, but for all that shouldn't we still say it's a bad
consequence? And as a result of that, shouldn't we say that however far
appeal to consequences goes in terms of giving us our moral theory,
don't we have to say in terms of consequences, or with regard to
consequences, suicide is immoral?</p>

<p>But not so quick! Even though it's true that normally death is a bad
thing, it's not always a bad thing. This is the sort of thing that
we've learned by thinking about what does the badness of death consist
in. Typical cases are ones in which the person's dying robs them of a
chunk of life that would've been good for them overall, and because of
that dying then is bad for them. But in the kinds of cases that we're
thinking about, cases where suicide would be rationally acceptable, and
we're now asking whether or not it's morally acceptable--in those sorts
of cases, at least the kind of paradigm examples that we've been
focused on, the person is better off dead. They're better off dead,
meaning that what life now holds out for them--although perhaps not
negative through and through--is negative on balance. It's negative on
balance; they're not better off continuing to live. They're better off
dying. And that means, of course, that dying isn't bad for them, but
rather good for them, and so their death is not a bad consequence, but
rather a good consequence.</p>

<p>Provided that you're prepared to accept the possibility of cases in
which somebody would be better off if their life ended sooner rather
than later, we're led to the conclusion that--from the moral point of
view as far as focusing on consequences goes--the consequences might
actually be good rather than bad if the person were to kill themself.
They will free themself, let's suppose, of the suffering they would
otherwise have to undergo. Well, that's--first glance said,
consequences says suicide's wrong. Second glance says, consequences
says, as least in certain circumstances, suicide's right. Of course,
third glance suggests, we can't just focus on consequences for the
person who is contemplating suicide. Because from the point of view of
morality we have to look at the consequences for everybody.</p>

<p>Who else might get affected by the death or suicide of the person?
Well, the most obvious people for us to think about at that point then
are the family and loved ones--the people who most directly know about
and care about the person who is contemplating suicide. And again--I'm
running out of glances, but at first glance you might say, well, there
the consequences are clearly bad. When the person kills themself that
causes, typically, a great deal of distress for the family and friends
of the person who has killed themself.</p>

<p>Even if that's true, we now have to ask, how do the consequences
weigh out? After all, we live in a world in which no single act
typically has only good consequences, or no single act has bad
consequences and only bad consequences. Often our choices are mixed
packages where we have to ask whether the good that we can do is
greater than the bad that we'd be doing with this act or that act or
some third act.</p>

<p>Even if there are, then, negative consequences in terms of distress
to the family, friends, and loved ones, of the person who kills
themself, that might still be outweighed by the benefit to the person
himself or herself, if it was really the case that he or she would be
better off dying.</p>

<p>But it's also worth bearing in mind that insofar as we're thinking
about people who love and care about the person who is considering
dying, then they may actually overall, on balance, be relieved that the
suffering of their loved one has come to an end. We will, of course,
all be horribly distressed that nature, or the Fates, or what have you,
has brought it about that this person's choices are now reduced to
killing themself on the one hand, or continuing the terminal stages of
some illness where they're incapacitated and in pain. We will, of
course, wish there was a serious prospect of a cure, some chance of
recovery, wish they'd never gotten ill in the first place.</p>

<p>But given the limited choices, continued suffering and pain, on the
one hand, or having an end to that suffering and pain, if the person
can rationally assess their prospects and reasonably come to believe
they're better off dead, then that's a judgment their loved ones can
come to share as well. They may well regret the fact--more than regret,
<i>curse</i> the fact--that these are the only choices they've got, but
still, given the limited choices they may agree, they may come to
agree, better to put an end to the suffering. And so when the person
kills themself, they may second that choice. They may say, "At least
they're not in pain and agony anymore."</p>

<p>So, if we look at it from the point of view of consequences--in
fact, suppose we had a moral view that said consequences aren't just
one thing that was morally relevant in thinking about what makes an
action right or wrong. Suppose we took the bold claim that consequences
are the only thing that's morally relevant. There are moral views that
take this position. I suppose the best-known example of this kind of
consequence-only approach to morality is utilitarianism. Utilitarianism
is the moral doctrine that says right and wrong is a matter of
producing as much happiness for everybody as possible, counting
everybody's happiness equally. And when you can't produce happiness,
then at least trying to minimize the misery and suffering, counting
everybody's misery and suffering equally.</p>

<p>So, suppose we accept this utilitarian position. What conclusions
would we come to then about the morality of suicide? I suppose the
conclusion would be a kind of moderate one. On the one hand, we'd be
rejecting the extreme that says suicide is never morally acceptable,
because to say that, you'd have to be claiming suicide always has bad
consequences overall. And that strikes me, although it's an empirical
claim, it strikes me as a rather implausible empirical claim. It's,
sadly enough, not too difficult to describe cases in which the results
may actually be better if the person kills themself rather than having
their suffering continue. It may be better for them and better for
their family.</p>

<p>On the other hand, we certainly wouldn't want--if we were
utilitarians--we also wouldn't want to go to the other extreme and say
suicide is always morally acceptable, because, of course, to say that
it's always morally acceptable is to say that the consequences are
never bad when you kill yourself. And that's also pretty obviously an
implausible thing to claim. You guys are young, you're healthy, you've
got a great future in front of you. If you were to kill yourself, the
results wouldn't be good. The results would be worse overall than if
you had refrained from killing yourself.</p>

<p>So, the utilitarian position is in the middle. It doesn't say
suicide's never acceptable, doesn't say suicide is always acceptable.
It says, perhaps unsurprisingly, it's sometimes acceptable; it depends
on the facts. It depends on the results. It depends on comparing the
results of this action, killing yourself, to the alternatives open to
you. We have to ask, is your life worse than nothing? Is there some
medical procedure available to you that would cure you? If there is,
and even if your life is worse than nothing, that still doesn't make it
the best choice in terms of the consequences. Getting medical help is a
preferable choice in terms of the consequences.</p>

<p>We can even think of cases where your life is worse than nothing,
you'd be better off dead, and there is no medical alternative of a cure
available to you, but for all that, it <i>still</i> isn't morally
legitimate to kill yourself in terms of the utilitarian outlook.
Because, as always, we have to think about the consequences for others.
And there may be others who'd be so adversely affected by your death
that the harm to them outweighs the cost to you of keeping yourself
alive. Suppose, for example, that you're the single parent of young
children. You've got a kind of moral obligation to look after them. If
you were to die, they'd really have it horribly. It's conceivable then,
in cases like that, the suffering of your children, were you to kill
yourself, would outweigh the suffering that you'd have to undergo were
you to keep yourself alive for the sake of your children. So, it all
depends on the facts.</p>

<p>Still, if we accept the utilitarian position, we do end up with a
moderate conclusion. In certain circumstances suicide will be morally
justified--roughly speaking, in those cases where you're better off
dead and the effects on others aren't so great as to outweigh that.
Those will be the paradigm cases in which suicide makes sense or is
legitimate, morally speaking, from the utilitarian perspective.</p>

<p>But of course, that doesn't mean that suicide is indeed ever morally
legitimate. Because we don't necessarily want to embrace the
utilitarian theory of morality. Utilitarianism is what you get, roughly
speaking, when we say consequences matter and they're <i>all</i> that
matters. But most of us are inclined to think that there's more to
morality than consequences. Most of us are inclined to think that there
are cases in which actions can have bad results--rather, actions can
have good results and yet, for all that, be morally forbidden. Or
actions could have bad results and yet, for all that, still be morally
required. That's not to say that consequences don't matter morally;
it's to claim, rather, that consequences aren't the <i>only</i> thing
that matters morally. Consequences can be outweighed by other morally
relevant factors. Well, that's the position that's held by the branch
of moral theory known as deontology.</p>

<p>So deontologists say other things matter morally besides
consequences. In deciding whether your action is right or wrong, you
have to pay attention to the consequences, but you have to pay
attention to other things as well. What other things? Well,
unsurprisingly, this is an area then in which different deontologists
will disagree one to the next in terms of what else they want to add to
the list of morally relevant factors. But there's one kind of
additional factor that most of us in our deontological moods would want
to add to the list, and that's this--so one, at any rate, that's
relevant I think, most directly relevant for thinking about suicide.
That factor is the factor of not just what was the upshot of your
action but how you <i>produced</i> that upshot; not just what the
results were, but what was your <i>means</i> of getting those results
and more particularly still, did you have to <i>harm</i> anybody to
produce the results?</p>

<p>Most of us are inclined to think it's wrong to harm people, or at
least innocent people. It's wrong to harm innocent people even if the
results of doing that might be good. Now, I threw in the qualification
about innocent people because, of course, it's also true that most of
us are inclined to think that self-defense might be justified. Harming
people who are attacking you or your friends or your fellow
countrymen--that may be legitimate. And so it's not as though we want
to say it's never legitimate to harm somebody. But those people are
guilty; they're aggressors. What most of us in our deontological moods
are inclined to think is it's never legitimate to harm an
<i>innocent</i> person. And the crucial point is that's true even if
the results would be better.</p>

<p>Look, there's no debate between deontologists and utilitarians about
harming innocent people in the normal case, because normally of
course--you know, suppose I, to make an example--to end the class with
a nice big bang, right--I brought my Uzi sub-machine gun. I now take it
and go rat-a-tat-tat, killing 15 of you. Well, that would not be
something that would have good results. And so, clearly, the
utilitarian is going to reject that as well as the deontologist.
They're in agreement about that. In the typical case, killing an
innocent person has bad results, harms them. It's wrong, full stop,
we're done.</p>

<p>But what should we say about cases where killing an innocent person
has better results? In real life, it's hard to think of cases like
that, but we can at least go "science-fictiony" and tell an example.
So, here is one of my favorite examples in moral philosophy.</p>

<p>Suppose that we have five patients in a hospital who are going to
die because of organ failures of one sort or another. One of them needs
a heart transplant, one of them needs a kidney transplant, one of them
needs a liver transplant, and so forth and so on. Unfortunately,
because of tissue incompatibilities, even as they begin to die we can't
use the organs from the ones that have died to save the others.
Meanwhile, here in the hospital for a routine check-up is John. John's
perfectly healthy. And as you're doing your exams on him you discover
that he's exactly suitable to be an organ donor for all five of the
patients. And it occurs to you that if you were to find some way to
kill him, but cover up the cause of death so it looked like he died of
some unexpected freak seizure, you could then use his organs to save
the five. This one gets the kidney, that one gets the other kidney,
that one gets the heart, that one gets the liver, and that one gets the
lungs. So your choice, roughly, is this. Just give John his routine
medical exam, in which case the five other patients die, or chop up
John, kill him and chop him up, using his organs to save the five
patients.</p>

<p>Well, what should we say is the right thing to do the organ
transplant case? In terms of consequences it looks as though, if we
tell the story right at least, the results would be better if we chop
up John. After all, it's one versus five. And although the death of
John is a horrible bad result, the death of the five is a horrible bad
result. And so the results would be better if we were to kill innocent
John.</p>

<p>Well, if we had more time we could argue about are the results
really going to be better, is that a realistic story--what have
you--are there other long-term effects on the healthcare profession
that we haven't taken into account? But we don't have time to really
pursue this story in detail. Let's just suppose we could eventually get
the details right; the results really would be better if we chopped up
John. Is that the right thing to do?</p>

<p>Well, maybe utilitarianism says it's the right thing to do, but it's
precisely for that reason that most of us would then say, you know,
there's more to morality than what utilitarianism says. Now, whether
that objection is a good one is a very, very complicated question, and
if you want--if you'd like to pursue it--if you want to pursue it--then
I invite you to take an introductory class in moral philosophy. For our
purposes, let's just suppose that most of us are on board with the
deontologists when they say there's more to morality than what the
utilitarian has, and this example brings it out. It's wrong to kill
somebody who is innocent even though by hypothesis the results would be
better--it's five to one. People have a right to life, a right not to
be killed. And that right weighs in when we're deciding what to do
morally, so that it's wrong to kill an innocent person even if the
results really would be better.</p>

<p>All right, let's suppose we agree with that--accept that. Again, in
a fuller class on moral philosophy we'd have to ask ourselves what is
the basis of that right, what other deontological rights do people
have, what exactly are the contours of that right? But here we can just
ask, suppose we accept a right like that, what are the implications of
that for the morality of suicide? And now, it seems what we have to say
is, suicide is wrong. Suicide is morally unacceptable. Because when I
kill myself, well, I'm killing somebody. And didn't we just say as
deontologists that killing an innocent person--and I'm an innocent
person--killing an innocent person is morally wrong? Well, I'm a
person. So, killing <i>me</i> is morally wrong.</p>

<p>And it's not really any help to come back and say, but look, we've
stipulated that this is a case where the person is better off dead. The
results will really be better overall if he kills himself. Yeah, that's
right. Maybe that is right. It doesn't matter--because as deontologists
we said the right to life is so powerful it outweighs consequences.
Just as it was wrong to chop up John, even though the results would be
better--five versus one--it's wrong to kill <i>yourself,</i> even if
the results would be better. Even if that's the only way to put
yourself out of pain, and those are good results, it doesn't matter.
The right to life outweighs the appeal to consequences. So as
deontologists, it seems, we have to say suicide is forbidden--full
stop.</p>

<p>Well, as usual in philosophy, it's not quite as simple as that. One
possible response somebody might make is, but look, morality is only
about how I treat others. It's not about how I treat myself. And if we
were to accept that claim, then we could say the right to life only
covers how I treat others. In particular, it rules out my killing other
people even when the results would be good. But it doesn't have any
implications for how I treat myself. And in particular then, if the
right to life doesn't exclude self-killing, well then, suicide is
acceptable.</p>

<p>That's a possible moral view, but I find it rather implausible. If
we were to start to explain what it is about <i>you</i> that explains
why it's wrong for me to kill you, we'd start saying things about how,
well, you're a person and, as such, you've got all these plans and so
forth and so on. And as a person, you've got certain rights, certain
things that shouldn't be done to you. You're not just, --This is the
thought that lies behind much deontological thinking, right? People
aren't objects. We can't just destroy them for the sake of better
results. Well, that's right; people aren't objects. But of course, I'm
a person too. And so when I contemplate killing myself, I'm
contemplating destroying a person. So, it's at least difficult to see
why we would accept the claim that morality only governs how I treat
other people. It seems--although the issue is a complicated one, which
we don't have time to pursue further today--it seems to me more
plausible to say morality includes rules not only governing how I treat
others but also how I treat myself.</p>

<p>Yet, if that's right, and if among the moral rules are a right to
life, a prohibition against harming people, then don't we have to say,
look, it's wrong from the deontological perspective to kill yourself.
Well, of course, the natural response to this line of thought is to
say, but look, when I kill myself--unlike the case of chopping up John
to save five others--when I kill myself, I'm doing it for my <i>own</i>
sake. I'm harming myself for my <i>own</i> sake. That seems highly
relevant in thinking about the morality of suicide.</p>

<p>It does seem relevant, though it's not 100 % clear what to do with
that thought. Here are two possible interpretations of that thought.
First of all, you might think that the relevance of saying that I'm
harming myself for my own sake is this. If I'm harming myself for my
own sake, what I'm saying is, despite the fact that I'm harming myself,
I'm better off. After all, we stipulated that we were focusing on cases
in which suicide was rational. So, the person is better off dead. If
they're better off dead, then although it's certainly true that there's
a sense in which they're harming themself--I mean killing yourself is
doing harm to yourself--still it's not harm <i>overall</i>. The bottom
line, we were imagining, is positive when you kill yourself. And so,
although, unlike the case of John where you've harmed him and benefited
others--so you have harmed him overall--in the case of suicide, when I
harm myself to avoid the suffering I would otherwise go through, I'm
not really, as we might say, harming myself overall.</p>

<p>So, perhaps the deontological prohibition against harm is really a
prohibition against harming people <i>overall</i>. Look, you've got
some sort of a disease in your--infection in your leg that has now
spread and it's going to kill you unless we amputate your leg. So, you
go into surgery and the surgeon chops off your leg. Has he done
something immoral? It doesn't seem as though he has. But after all, he
chopped off your leg! He harmed you! You used to have a leg and now you
don't have one. Well, what we want to say is he didn't harm you
overall. He harmed you in such a way that it was the only way to leave
you better off bottom line, and that's not a violation of the rule
against harming. At least, that's a possible thing to say. And if
that's the right thing to say, then maybe that's what we should say
about the suicide case yet again. Yeah, there's a deontological
prohibition against harming innocent people, but what it's really a
prohibition against, is leaving them worse off overall. And when I kill
myself, I'm not leaving myself worse off overall. And if that's right,
then even from the deontological perspective suicide may be morally
legitimate. Well, that's at least one possible way to carry out the
deontological stand, one possible way of interpreting the remark, "But
look, when I kill myself, I'm doing it for my own benefit."</p>

<p>Here's another possible way of interpreting that thought. When I
kill myself, given that I'm doing it for my own benefit, I've obviously
got my own <i>agreement</i>. I can't kill myself against my will.
Suicide is something you do to yourself. And so, I have my own consent
to what I'm doing. That seems pretty important. Notice how different it
is from the case of John. When I chopped up John, I imagine I don't
have John's approval. Consent seems to be present in the case of
suicide but not in the case of chopping up John. Maybe that's morally
relevant as well. Now, to accept that view is, of course, to say we
need to add yet another factor into our deontological theory. We have
consequences, we have harm doing, but we also have the factor of
<i>consent</i>. And so we need to think about the moral relevance of
having the consent of the victim. And once we start thinking about
that, I think most of us would be inclined to accept the conclusion
that consent can make it acceptable to do to someone what would
normally be wrong in the absence of their consent.</p>

<p>By the by, you'll notice that that seems to be one of the things
that's relevant in thinking about the surgery case, not the organ
transplant case but the performing the amputation of the leg, to save
the person who would otherwise die. Surely it seems relevant that the
patient has given you permission to operate on them.</p>

<p>Here's another example that shows you the relevance of consent. It
would not be okay--it would not be morally acceptable for me to go up
and hit you in the nose. Just like it wouldn't be okay for you to go up
and hit me in the face or the gut. And yet, boxing matches are, I
suppose, morally acceptable. Why is that? Because from a deontological
perspective the answer is, when people are boxing they've agreed to it.
I give you permission to hit me, or at least to try to hit me, in
exchange for your giving me permission to hit you, or at least to try
to hit you. And it's the presence of that consent that makes it
permissible for you to harm me, assuming that you're a better boxer
than I am, which I'm confident would have to be the case.</p>

<p>So, consent makes it legitimate to harm people, even though in the
absence of consent it wouldn't be legitimate. All right, if that's
right, then bring that thought home to thinking about the case of
suicide. Suicide might be wrong, because after all I'm a person, at
first glance. But since I'm killing myself, I've given myself
permission. I've given myself consent to harm myself. And if consent
makes it permissible to do what would normally be forbidden, then
consent makes it permissible for me to kill myself. And so, now we're
led again to the conclusion that from a more fully developed
deontological perspective we ought to say suicide is permissible, at
least if we're prepared to throw in this kind of factor of consent and
think that it can just wipe out the protections that would otherwise
normally be in place.</p>

<p>Indeed, if we think that, we're going to be led to a rather bold and
extreme conclusion about the morality of suicide. The person has killed
himself, so he's clearly consented, and so in <i>every</i> case what
he's done is acceptable. Well, maybe that's right--if we're prepared to
go that far with the principle of consent. But maybe we shouldn't go
that far with the principle of consent.</p>

<p>Suppose we're talking after class and you say to me, "Shelly, you've
got my permission to kill me." And so I get out my gun and I shoot you
to death. It doesn't seem morally acceptable, even though you gave me
your permission, especially--Think of even weirder cases. Suppose that
you are feeling like you want to killed because you're overcome with
guilt because you believe you killed John Smith. But you're crazy. You
didn't kill John Smith. John Smith's not even dead. But in your
insanity you think you did do it, and so you say, "Shelly, please kill
me." And I know that you're insane, but hey, you know, consent's
consent, and so I kill you. Well, that clearly isn't acceptable. Or
suppose you're playing with your three-year-old nephew. He says, "Oh
yeah, I don't really like being alive. Kill me." Well, that clearly
doesn't make it acceptable to kill him or her--well, nephew, it's a
him.</p>

<p>So, if we start accepting this consent principle, we're led to some
pretty implausible conclusions. So, maybe we should throw it out. Maybe
we should say, no, consent really doesn't have the kind of power that a
minute ago it looked like it did. But I'm inclined to think we
shouldn't go that far and throw away the consent principle altogether.
Because if we do throw out the consent principle, we're going to find
ourselves unable to say some things that I think it's pretty important
to us to say.</p>

<p>Consider the following example. Suppose that we're in war and we're
in the foxhole and a hand grenade has been thrown into the foxhole. And
unless something happens quick, the hand grenade is going to blow up
and it will kill my five buddies who are near the hand grenade.
Unfortunately, because they're playing cards or whatever, they don't
see it. But <i>I</i> see it. But I don't have time to warn them. By the
time I tell them what's going on, they won't have time to react.
Really, it's do nothing, let them get killed but I probably won't be
hurt very much, or throw myself on the hand grenade, my body absorbs
the blow, saves my buddies, kills me.</p>

<p>Imagine what happens is that I throw myself on the hand grenade.
I've sacrificed myself for them. I've done something amazing. Few of us
would have it within ourselves to do this, but amazingly enough some
people do. And we admire and praise these people. They've
committed--they've undertaken an incredible act of heroic
self-sacrifice--morally commendable, above and beyond the call of duty
we want to say, praiseworthy. But wait a minute, how could it be
praiseworthy? The person threw himself on a hand grenade, knowing the
result of this was that he was going to die. And so he killed a person,
thereby, apparently, violating the deontological right not to have
innocent people be killed.</p>

<p>Don't talk about "the results are better." Yeah, of course, five
buddies saved; the results are better. But that doesn't seem enough to
use in our deontological moods. After all, suppose that I see the hand
grenade, and so what I do is I take Jones and throw him on the grenade.
Well, that's not okay, even though the results are the same.</p>

<p>What makes the difference? Why is it morally legitimate for Jones to
throw himself on the grenade? The only answer that I can see is,
because he agrees to it. He did it to himself; he volunteered, it has
his consent. If we throw away the consent principle, we're forced to
say what Jones did isn't morally admirable. It's morally appalling,
it's morally forbidden. I can't believe that.</p>

<p>So, we need a consent principle. But on the other hand, we don't
want to go with such a strong consent principle that we say, oh, it's
okay to kill crazy people, or kill children, just because they say,
"Oh, kill me." So we need something--a more moderate form of the
consent principle. We need to say consent can do its thing, but only
under certain conditions. What exactly are the relevant conditions?
Well, this is, of course, one more topic open for debate. We might
insist that, look, the permission has got to be given freely. It's got
to be given knowing what the upshots are going to be. It's got to be
given by somebody who is sane, who is rational, who is competent,
who's--and that may deal with the child case as well, who is not yet
competent to make this sort of decision. There's room for disagreement
about what exactly are the relevant conditions to put into a proper
version of the consent principle.</p>

<p>We might also want to throw in some requirement that the person have
good reasons for his giving you permission. That might deal with the
case where you just come up to me after class and say, "Kill me." I
mean you're not insane. Well, at least you might not be insane. You
know what's going to happen. In some sense, you've reached the age of
competence, but you don't have any good reasons for it. Maybe that's
enough to undermine the force of consent.</p>

<p>Well, suppose we've got some kind of modified consent principle.
What should we say about suicide then? Well, it seems to me what we're
led to is, once again, a modest view about suicide. The mere fact that
the person killed themself won't show that it was morally legitimate
because, of course, even though they've given themself permission, they
may not have had, for example, good reason, or they might be insane.
But for all that, if we can have cases--and I take it we <i>can</i>
have cases--where somebody rationally assesses their situation, sees
that they're better off dead, thinks the case through, doesn't rush
into it, makes an informed and voluntary decision, with good reason
behind it--in a situation like that it seems to me the consent
principle might well come into play, in which case consent will trump
or nullify the force of the deontological prohibition against harming
innocent people. So, suicide will again be acceptable in some cases,
though not in all.</p>

<p>And that's the conclusion that seems to me to be the right one,
whether we accept the utilitarian position or one of these
deontological positions. Suicide isn't always legitimate, but it's
<i>sometimes</i> legitimate.</p>

<p>It still leaves the question, what should we do when we see, when we
come across, somebody trying to kill themself?" And there I think there
is good reason to ask yourself, are you confident that the person has
satisfied the conditions on the consent principle? Perhaps we should
err on the side of caution, and assume that the person may be acting
under distress, not thinking clearly, not informed, not altogether
competent, not acting for good reasons. But to accept that is not to
accept the stronger conclusion that we must never permit somebody to
kill themself. If we become convinced that they have thought it
through, that they do have good reason, that they are informed, that
they are acting voluntarily, in some such cases it may be legitimate
for them to kill themself, and for us to let them.</p>

<p>All right, almost out of time. So, let me shift gears for the very
last time, and take a quick look at where we've been. At the start of
the semester, I invited you to think hard about the nature of death or
the facts about life and death. Most of us try very hard to not think
hard about death. It seems to be an unpleasant topic, and we put it out
of our mind. We don't think about it, even when there's a sense in
which it's staring us in the face. Every single class of this semester,
every single day of this semester, you've come into this building and
have walked past a cemetery right across the street. How many times did
you notice it? How many times did you stop to think about the complete
visual reminder that we are on this Earth for a while, and then we're
not anymore? Most of us just don't think about it.</p>

<p>Well, of course you are, in some sense, the exceptions. You've spent
a semester thinking about it, and I'll be largely content if you've
taken the opportunity this semester to take a hard look at the things
you believe. Whether or not you ended up agreeing with me, about the
various claims that I've put forward, is less important than that
you've taken the chance to take a hard look at your beliefs and asked
yourself not just what you hoped or wished or kind of believed was
true, but what you could actually defend. Still, having said that, it
would be disingenuous of me to pretend that I don't also hope that
you've come around--if you didn't start out believing what I
believe--that you've come around to believing what I believe.</p>

<p>As I pointed out on the first day, most people accept a great deal
of this package of beliefs about the nature of life and death,
that--They believe we have a soul, that there's something more to us
than our bodies. And they believe that because they think, given the
existence of a soul, we'll have the possibility of living forever.
Immortality is a possibility, and we all hope for and crave the
possibility that we will live forever because death is, and must be,
horrible. It's so horrible that we try not to think about it. It's so
horrible that when we do think about it we're filled with dread, terror
and fear. And it's just obvious that that's the only sensible reaction
to the facts about life and death. Life is so incredible that under no
circumstances could it ever make sense to be glad that it had come to
an end. Immortality would be desirable; suicide could never be a
reasonable response.</p>

<p>Over the course of this semester, I've argued that that package of
beliefs, common as it may be, is mistaken, virtually from start to
finish. There is no soul, we are just machines. We're not just any old
machine; we are <i>amazing</i> machines. We are machines capable of
loving, capable of dreaming, capable of being creative, capable of
making plans and sharing them with others. We are people. But we're
just machines anyway. And when the machine breaks, that's the end.
Death is not some big mystery which we can't get our heads around.
Death is in some sense no more mysterious than the fact that your lamp
can break, or your computer can break, or any other machine will
eventually fail.</p>

<p>I never meant to claim that it's not regrettable that we die the way
we do. As I argued when talking about immortality, better still would
be if only we had the prospect of living as long as life still had
something left to offer us. As long as life would be good overall,
death is bad, and I think for most of us death comes too soon. But
having said that, it doesn't follow that immortality would be a good
thing. On the contrary, immortality would be a bad thing.</p>

<p>The reaction that makes sense in thinking about the facts of death
is not to find it as some great mystery too dreadful to think about,
too overwhelming. But rather, fear, far from being the rationally
appropriate response I think, is an <i>inappropriate</i> response.
Although we can be sad that we die too soon, that perhaps should be
balanced by the fact of--the recognition of--just how incredibly lucky
we all are to have been alive at all.</p>

<p>Yet, at the same time, recognizing that sense of luck and being
fortunate doesn't mean that we're always lucky to be remaining alive.
For some of us the time will come in which that's no longer true, and
when that happens life is not something to be held onto, come what may,
under any and all circumstances. The time could come for some of us in
which it's time to let go.</p>

<p>What I then invited you to do, over the course of the semester, is
not only to think for yourself about the facts of life and death, but I
invite you all to come to face death without fear and without illusion.
Thanks very much [applause].</p>

<p>[end of transcript]</p>

<br />
<br />
</div>

<p><a id="backToTop" href="#top">back to top</a></p>
